THE DREAM PLAY

1902




A REMINDER

As he did in his previous dream play,[1] so in this one the
author has tried to imitate the disconnected but seemingly
logical form of the dream. Anything may happen; everything
is possible and probable. Time and space do not exist. On an
insignificant background of reality, imagination designs and
embroiders novel patterns: a medley of memories, experiences,
free fancies, absurdities and improvisations.

The characters split, double, multiply, vanish, solidify, blur,
clarify. But one consciousness reigns above them all--that
of the dreamer; and before it there are no secrets, no
incongruities, no scruples, no laws. There is neither judgment
nor exoneration, but merely narration. And as the dream is
mostly painful, rarely pleasant, a note of melancholy and of
pity with all living things runs right through the wabbly tale.
Sleep, the liberator, plays often a dismal part, but when the
pain is at its worst, the awakening comes and reconciles the
sufferer with reality, which, however distressing it may be,
nevertheless seems happy in comparison with the torments of the
dream.

[Footnote 1: The trilogy "To Damascus."]




PROLOGUE


      _The background represents cloud banks that resemble
      corroding slate cliffs with ruins of castles and
      fortresses_.

      _The constellations of Leo, Virgo, and Libra are
      visible, and from their midst the planet Jupiter is
      shining with a strong light_.

      THE DAUGHTER OF INDRA _stands on the topmost cloud_.

THE VOICE OF INDRA [_from above_].

Where are you, daughter, where?

THE DAUGHTER.

Here, father, here.

THE VOICE.

You've lost your way, my child--beware, you sink--How got you
there?

THE DAUGHTER.

    I followed from ethereal heights the ray
    Of lightning, and for car a cloud I took--
    It sank, and now my journey downward tends.
    O, noble father, Indra, tell what realms
    I now draw near? The air is here so close,
    And breathing difficult.

THE VOICE.

    Behind you lies the second world; the third
    Is where you stand. From Cukra, morning star
    You have withdrawn yourself to enter soon
    The vapoury circle of the earth. For mark
    The Seventh House you take. It's Libra called:
    There stands the day-star in the balanced hour
    When Fall gives equal weight to night and day.

THE DAUGHTER.

    You named the earth--is that the ponderous world
    And dark, that from the moon must take its light?

THE VOICE.

    It is the heaviest and densest sphere
    Of all that travel through the space.

THE DAUGHTER.

    And is it never brightened by the sun?

THE VOICE.

    Of course, the sun does reach it--now and then--

THE DAUGHTER.

    There is a rift, and downward goes my glance----

THE VOICE.

    What sees my child?

THE DAUGHTER.

    I see--O beautiful!--with forests green,
    With waters blue, white peaks, and yellow fields

THE VOICE.

    Yes, beautiful as all that Brahma made--
    But still more beautiful it was of yore,
    In primal morn of ages. Then occurred
    Some strange mishap; the orbit was disturbed;
    Rebellion led to crime that called for check----

THE DAUGHTER.

    Now from below I hear some sounds arise--
    What sort of race is dwelling there?

THE VOICE.

    See for yourself--Of Brahma's work no ill
    I say: but what you hear, it is their speech.

THE DAUGHTER.

    It sounds as if--it has no happy ring!

THE VOICE.

    I fear me not--for even their mother-tongue
    Is named complaint. A race most hard to please,
    And thankless, are the dwellers on the earth

THE DAUGHTER.

    O, say not so--for I hear cries of joy,
    Hear noise and thunder, see the lightnings flash--
    Now bells are ringing, fires are lit,
    And thousand upon thousand tongues
    Sing praise and thanks unto the heavens on high--
    Too harshly, father, you are judging them.

THE VOICE.

    Descend, that you may see and hear, and then
    Return and let me know if their complaints
    And wailings have some reasonable ground----

THE DAUGHTER.

    Well then, I go; but, father, come with me.

THE VOICE.

    No, there below I cannot breathe----

THE DAUGHTER.

    Now sinks the cloud--what sultriness--I choke!
    I am not breathing air, but smoke and steam--
    With heavy weight it drags me down,
    And I can feel already how it rolls--
    Indeed, the best of worlds is not the third

THE VOICE.

    The best I cannot call it, nor the worst.
    Its name is Dust; and like them all, it rolls:
    And therefore dizzy sometimes grows the race,
    And seems to be half foolish and half mad--
    Take courage, child--a trial, that is all!

THE DAUGHTER. [_Kneeling as the cloud sinks downward_]

    I sink!

_Curtain_.



      _The background represents a forest of gigantic
      hollyhocks in bloom. They are white, pink, crimson,
      sulphureous, violet; and above their tops is seen
      the gilded roof of a castle, the apex of which is
      formed by a bud resembling a crown. At the foot of
      the castle walls stand a number of straw ricks,
      and around these stable litter is scattered. The
      side-scenes, which remain unchanged throughout the
      play, show conventionalised frescoes, suggesting
      at once internal decoration, architecture, and
      landscape_.

      _Enter_ THE GLAZIER _and_ THE DAUGHTER.


THE DAUGHTER. The castle is growing higher and higher above the
ground. Do you see how much it has grown since last year?

THE GLAZIER. [_To himself_] I have never seen this castle
before--have never heard of a castle that grew, but--[_To_ THE
DAUGHTER, _with firm conviction_] Yes, it has grown two yards,
but that is because they have manured it--and it you notice, it
has put out a wing on the sunny side.

THE DAUGHTER. Ought it not to be blooming soon, as we are
already past midsummer?

THE GLAZIER. Don't you see the flower up there?

THE DAUGHTER. Yes, I see! [_Claps her hands_] Say, father, why
do flowers grow out of dirt?

THE GLAZIER, [_Simply_] Because they do not feel at home in the
dirt, and so they make haste to get up into the light in order
to blossom and die.

THE DAUGHTER. Do you know who lives in that castle?

THE GLAZIER. I have known it, but cannot remember.

THE DAUGHTER. I believe a prisoner is kept there--and he must be
waiting for me to set him free.

THE GLAZIER. And what is he to pay for it?

THE DAUGHTER. One does not bargain about one's duty. Let us go
into the castle.

THE GLAZIER. Yes, let us go in.

_They go toward the background, which opens and slowly
disappears to either side_.

_The stage shows now a humble, bare room, containing only a
table and a few chairs. On one of the chairs sits an officer,
dressed in a very unusual yet modern uniform. He is tilting the
chair backward and beating the table with his sabre_.

THE DAUGHTER. [_Goes to the officer, from whose hand she gently
takes the sabre_] Don't! Don't!

THE OFFICER. Oh, Agnes dear, let me keep the sabre.

THE DAUGHTER. No, you break the table. [_To_ THE GLAZIER] Now
you go down to the harness-room and fix that window pane. We'll
meet later.

      [THE GLAZIER _goes out_.

THE DAUGHTER. You are imprisoned in your own rooms--I have come
to set you free.

THE OFFICER. I have been waiting for you, but I was not sure you
were willing to do it.

THE DAUGHTER. The castle is strongly built; it has seven walls,
but--it can be done!--Do you want it, or do you not?

THE OFFICER. Frankly speaking, I cannot tell--for in either
case I shall suffer pain. Every joy that life brings has to be
paid for with twice its measure of sorrow. It is hard to stay
where I am, but if I buy the sweets of freedom, then I shall
have to suffer twice as much--Agnes, I'll rather endure it as it
is, if I can only see you.

THE DAUGHTER. What do you see in me?

THE OFFICER. Beauty, which is the harmony of the universe--There
are lines of your body which are nowhere to be found, except
in the orbits of the solar system, in strings that are singing
softly, or in the vibrations of light--You are a child of
heaven----

THE DAUGHTER. So are you.

THE OFFICER. Why must I then keep horses, tend stable, and cart
straw?

THE DAUGHTER. So that you may long to get away from here.

THE OFFICER. I am longing, but it is so hard to find one's way
out.

THE DAUGHTER. But it is a duty to seek freedom in the light.

THE OFFICER. Duty? Life has never recognised any duties toward
me.

THE DAUGHTER. You feel yourself wronged by life?

THE OFFICER. Yes, it has been unjust----

      _Now voices are heard from behind a 'partition, which
      a moment later is pulled away_. THE OFFICER _and_
      THE DAUGHTER _look in that direction and stop as if
      paralysed in the midst of a gesture_.

      _At a table sits_ THE MOTHER, _looking very sick. In
      front of her a tallow candle is burning, and every
      little while she trims it with, a pair of snuffers.
      The table is piled with new-made shirts, and these
      she is marking with a quill and ink. To the left
      stands a brown-coloured wardrobe_.

THE FATHER. [_Holds out a silk mantilla toward_ THE MOTHER _and
says gently_] You don't want it?

THE MOTHER. A silk mantilla for me, my dear--of what use would
that be when I am going to die shortly?

THE FATHER. Do you believe what the doctor says?

THE MOTHER. Yes, I believe also what he says, but still more
what the voice says in here.

THE FATHER. [_Sadly_] It is true then?--And you are thinking of
your children first and last.

THE MOTHER. That has been my life and my reason for living--my
joy and my sorrow

THE FATHER. Christine, forgive me--everything!

THE MOTHER. What have I to forgive? Dearest, you forgive _me_!
We have been tormenting each other. Why? That we may not know.
We couldn't do anything else--However, here is the new linen for
the children. See that they change twice a week--Wednesdays and
Sundays--and that Louise washes them--their whole bodies--Are
you going out?

THE FATHER. I have to be in the Department at eleven o'clock.

THE MOTHER. Ask Alfred to come in before you go.

THE FATHER. [_Pointing to_ THE OFFICER] Why, he is standing
right there, dear heart.

THE MOTHER. So my eyes are failing, too--Yes, it is turning
dark. [_Trims the candle_] Come here, Alfred.

      THE FATHER _goes out through the middle of the wall,
      nodding good-bye as he leaves_.

      THE OFFICER _goes over to_ THE MOTHER.

THE MOTHER. Who is that girl?

THE OFFICER, [_Whispers_] It is Agnes.

THE MOTHER. Oh, is that Agnes?--Do you know what they say?--That
she is a daughter of the god Indra who has asked leave to
descend to the earth in order that she may find out what the
conditions of men are--But don't say anything about it.

THE OFFICER. A child of the gods, indeed!

THE MOTHER. [_Aloud_] My Alfred, I must soon part from you and
from the other children--But let me first speak a word to you
that bears on all the rest of your life.

THE OFFICER. [_Sadly_] Speak, mother.

THE MOTHER. Only a word: don't quarrel with God!

THE OFFICER. What do you mean, mother?

THE MOTHER. Don't go around feeling that life has wronged you.

THE OFFICER. But when I am treated unjustly----

THE MOTHER. You are thinking of the time when you were unjustly
punished for having taken a penny that later turned up?

THE OFFICER. Yes, and that one wrong gave a false twist to my
whole life----

THE MOTHER. Perhaps. But please take a look into that wardrobe
now----

THE OFFICER. [_Embarrassed_] You know, then? It is----

THE MOTHER. The Swiss Family Robinson--for which----

THE OFFICER. Don't say any more!

THE MOTHER. For which your brother was punished--and which you
had torn and hidden away.

THE OFFICER. Just think that the old wardrobe is still standing
there after twenty years--We have moved so many times, and my
mother died ten years ago.

THE MOTHER. Yes, and what of it? You are always asking all sorts
of questions, and in that way you spoil the better part of your
life--There is Lena, now.

LENA. [_Enters_] Thank you very much, ma'am, but I can't go to
the baptism.

THE MOTHER. And why not, my girl?

LENA. I have nothing to put on.

THE MOTHER. I'll let you use my mantilla here

LENA. Oh, no, ma'am, that wouldn't do!

THE MOTHER. Why not?--It is not likely that I'll go to any more
parties.

THE OFFICER. And what will father say? It is a present from
him----

THE MOTHER. What small minds----

THE FATHER. [_Puts his head through the wall_] Are you going to
lend my present to the servant girl?

THE MOTHER. Don't talk that way! Can you not remember that I
was a servant girl also? Why should you offend one who has done
nothing?

THE FATHER. Why should you offend me, your husband?

THE MOTHER. Oh, this life! If you do anything nice, there is
always somebody who finds it nasty. If you act kindly to one, it
hurts another. Oh, this life!

      _She trims the candle so that it goes out. The stage
      turns dark and the partition is pushed back to its
      former position_.

THE DAUGHTER. Men are to be pitied.

THE OFFICER. You think so?

THE DAUGHTER. Yes, life is hard--but love overcomes everything.
You shall see for yourself.

      [_They go toward the background.

      The background is raised and a new one revealed,
      showing an old, dilapidated party-wall. In the
      centre of it is a gate closing a passageway. This
      opens upon a green, sunlit space, where is seen a
      tremendous blue monk's-hood (aconite). To the left of
      the gate sits_ THE PORTRESS. _Her head and shoulders
      are covered by a shawl, and she is crocheting at a
      bed-spread with a star-like pattern. To the right of
      the gate is a billboard, which_ THE BILLPOSTER _is
      cleaning. Beside him stands a dipnet with a green
      pole. Further to the right is a door that has an
      air-hole shaped like a four-leaved clover. To the
      left of the gate stands a small linden tree with
      coal-black trunk and a few pale-green leaves. Near it
      is a small air-hole leading into a cellar._[1]

THE DAUGHTER. [_Going to_ THE PORTRESS] Is the spread not done
yet?

THE PORTRESS. No, dear. Twenty-six years on such a piece of work
is not much.

THE DAUGHTER. And your lover never came back?

THE PORTRESS. No, but it was not his fault. He had to go--poor
thing! That was thirty years ago now.

THE DAUGHTER. [_To_ THE BILLPOSTER] She belonged to the ballet?
Up there in the opera-house?

THE BILLPOSTER. She was number one--but when _he_ went, it was
as if her dancing had gone with him--and so she didn't get any
more parts.

THE DAUGHTER. Everybody complains--with their eyes, at least,
and often with words also----

THE BILLPOSTER. I don't complain very much--not now, since I
have a dipnet and a green cauf[2]----

THE DAUGHTER. And that can make you happy?

THE BILLPOSTER. Oh, I'm so happy, so--It was the dream of my
youth, and now it has come true. Of course, I have grown to be
fifty years----

THE DAUGHTER. Fifty years for a dipnet and a cauf----

THE BILLPOSTER. A _green_ cauf--mind you, _green_----

THE DAUGHTER. [_To_ THE PORTRESS] Let me have the shawl now,
and I shall sit here and watch the human children. But you must
stand behind me and tell me about everything.

      [_She takes the shawl and sits down at the gate._

THE PORTRESS. This is the last day, and the house will be closed
up for the season. This is the day when they learn whether their
contracts are to be renewed.

THE DAUGHTER. And those that fail of engagement----

THE PORTRESS. O, Lord have mercy! I pull the shawl over my head
not to see them.

THE DAUGHTER. Poor human creatures!

THE PORTRESS. Look, here comes one--She's not one of the chosen.
See, how she cries.

      THE SINGER _enters from the right; rushes through the
      gate with her handkerchief to her eyes; stops for a
      moment in the passageway beyond the gate and leans
      her head against the wall; then out quickly_.

THE DAUGHTER. Men are to be pitied!

THE PORTRESS. But look at this one. That's the way a happy
person looks.

      THE OFFICER _enters through the passageway; dressed
      in Prince Albert coat and high hat, and carrying a
      bunch of roses in one hand; he is radiantly happy_.

THE PORTRESS. He's going to marry Miss Victoria.

THE OFFICER. [_Far down on the stage, looks up and sings_]
Victoria!

THE PORTRESS. The young lady will be coming in a moment.

THE OFFICER. Good! The carriage is waiting, the table is set,
the wine is on ice--Oh, permit me to embrace you, ladies! [_He
embraces_ THE PORTRESS _and_ THE DAUGHTER. _Sings_] Victoria!

A WOMAN'S VOICE FROM ABOVE. [_Sings_] I am here!

THE DAUGHTER. Do you know me?

THE OFFICER. No, I know one woman only--Victoria. Seven years
I have come here to wait for her--at noon, when the sun touched
the chimneys, and at night, when it was growing dark. Look at
the asphalt here, and you will see the path worn by the steps
of a faithful lover. Hooray! She is mine. [_Sings_] Victoria!
[_There is no reply_] Well, she is dressing, I suppose.
[_To_ THE BILLPOSTER] There is the dipnet, I see. Everybody
belonging to the opera is crazy about dipnets--or rather about
fishes--because the fishes are dumb and cannot sing!--What is
the price of a thing like that?

THE BILLPOSTER. It is rather expensive.

THE OFFICER. [_Sings_] Victoria! [_Shakes the linden tree_]
Look, it is turning green once more. For the eighth time.
[_Sings_] Victoria!--Now she is fixing her hair. [_To_ THE
DAUGHTER] Look here, madam, could I not go up and get my bride?

THE PORTRESS. Nobody is allowed on the stage.

THE OFFICER. Seven years I have been coming here. Seven times
three hundred and sixty-five makes two thousand five hundred and
fifty-five. [_Stops and pokes at the door with the four-leaved
clover hole_] And I have been looking two thousand five hundred
and fifty-five times at that door without discovering where it
leads. And that clover leaf which is to let in light--for whom
is the light meant? Is there anybody within? Does anybody live
there?

THE PORTRESS. I don't know. I have never seen it opened.

THE OFFICER. It looks like a pantry door which I saw once
when I was only four years old and went visiting with the maid
on a Sunday afternoon. We called at several houses--on other
maids--but I did not get beyond the kitchen anywhere, and I had
to sit between the water barrel and the salt box. I have seen
so many kitchens in my days, and the pantry was always just
outside, with small round holes bored in the door, and one big
hole like a clover leaf--But there cannot be any pantry in the
opera-house as they have no kitchen. [_Sings_] Victoria!--Tell
me, madam, could she have gone out any other way?

THE PORTRESS. No, there is no other way.

THE OFFICER. Well, then I shall see her here.

      STAGE PEOPLE _rush out and are closely watched by_
      THE OFFICER _as they pass_.

THE OFFICER. Now she must soon be coming--Madam, that blue
monk's-hood outside--I have seen it since I was a child. Is it
the same?--I remember it from a country rectory where I stopped
when I was seven years old--There are two doves, two blue doves,
under the hood--but that time a bee came flying and went into
the hood. Then I thought: now I have you! And I grabbed hold
of the flower. But the sting of the bee went through it, and I
cried--but then the rector's wife came and put damp dirt on the
sting--and we had strawberries and cream for dinner--I think it
is getting dark already. [_To_ THE BILLPOSTER] Where are you
going?

THE BILLPOSTER. Home for supper.

THE OFFICER. [_Draws his hand across his eyes_] Evening? At
this time?--O, please, may I go in and telephone to the Growing
Castle?

THE DAUGHTER. What do you want there?

THE OFFICER. I am going to tell the Glazier to put in double
windows, for it will soon be winter, and I am feeling horribly
cold. [_Goes into the gatekeeper's lodge_.

THE DAUGHTER. Who is Miss Victoria?

THE PORTRESS. His sweetheart.

THE DAUGHTER. Right said! What she is to us and others matters
nothing to him. And what she is to him, that alone is her real
self.

      _It is suddenly turning dark_.

THE PORTRESS. [_Lights a lantern_] It is growing dark early
to-day.

THE DAUGHTER. To the gods a year is as a minute.

THE PORTRESS. And to men a minute may be as long as a year.

THE OFFICER. [_Enters again, looking dusty; the roses are
withered_] She has not come yet?

THE PORTRESS. No.

THE OFFICER. But she will come--She will come! [_Walks up and
down_] But come to think of it, perhaps I had better call off
the dinner after all--as it is late? Yes, I will do that.

      [_Goes back into the lodge and telephones_.

THE PORTRESS. [_To_ THE DAUGHTER] Can I have my shawl back now?

THE DAUGHTER. No, dear, be free a while. I shall attend to your
duties--for I want to study men and life, and see whether things
really are as bad as they say.

THE PORTRESS. But it won't do to fall asleep here--never sleep
night or day----

THE DAUGHTER. No sleep at night?

THE PORTRESS. Yes, if you are able to get it, but only with the
bell string tied around the wrist--for there are night watchmen
on the stage, and they have to be relieved every third hour.

THE DAUGHTER. But that is torture!

THE PORTRESS. So you think, but people like us are glad enough
to get such a job, and if you only knew how envied I am----

THE DAUGHTER. Envied?--Envy for the tortured?

THE PORTRESS. Yes--But I can tell you what is harder than all
drudging and keeping awake nights, harder to bear than draught
and cold and dampness--it is to receive the confidences of all
the unhappy people up there--They all come to me. Why? Perhaps
they read in the wrinkles of my face some runes that are graved
by suffering and that invite confessions--In that shawl, dear,
lie hidden thirty years of my own and other people's agonies.

THE DAUGHTER. It is heavy, and it burns like nettles.

THE PORTRESS. As it is your wish, you may wear it. When it grows
too burdensome, call me, and I shall relieve you.

THE DAUGHTER. Good-bye. What can be done by you ought not to
surpass my strength.

THE PORTRESS. We shall see!--But be kind to my poor friends, and
don't grow impatient of their complaints.

      [_She disappears through the passageway. Complete
      darkness covers the stage, and while it lasts the
      scene is changed so that the linden tree appears
      stripped of all its leaves. Soon the blue monk's-hood
      is withered, and when the light returns, the verdure
      in the open space beyond the passageway has changed
      into autumnal brown_.

THE OFFICER. [_Enters when it is light again. He has gray hair
and a gray beard. His clothes are shabby, his collar is soiled
and wrinkled. Nothing but the bare stems remain of the bunch of
roses. He walks to and fro_] To judge by all signs, Summer is
gone and Fall has come. The linden shows it, and the monk's-hood
also. [_Walks_] But the Fall is _my_ Spring, for then the opera
begins again, and then she must come. Please, madam, may I sit
down a little on this chair?

THE DAUGHTER. Yes, sit down, friend--I am able to stand.

THE OFFICER. [_Sits down_] If I could only get some sleep, then
I should feel better--[_He falls asleep for a few moments. Then
he jumps up and walks back and forth again. Stops at last in
front of the door with the clover leaf and pokes at_] This door
here will not leave me any peace--what is behind it? There must
be something. [_Faint dance music is heard from above_] Oh, now
the rehearsals have begun. [_The light goes out and flares up
again, repeating this rhythmically as the rays of a lighthouse
come and go_] What does this mean? [_Speaking in time with the
blinkings of the light_] Light and dark--light and dark?

THE DAUGHTER. [_Imitating him_] Night and day--night and day! A
merciful Providence wants to shorten your wait. Therefore the
days are flying in hot pursuit of the nights.

      _The light shines unbrokenly once more_.

      THE BILLPOSTER _enters with his dipnet and his
      implements_.

THE OFFICER. There is the Billposter with his dipnet. Was the
fishing good?

THE BILLPOSTER. I should say so. The Summer was hot and a little
long--the net turned out pretty good, but not as I had expected.

THE OFFICER. [_With emphasis_] Not as I had expected!--That is
well said. Nothing ever was as I expected it to be--because the
thought is more than the deed, more than the thing.

      _Walks to and fro, striking at the wall with the rose
      stems so that the last few leaves fall off_.

THE BILLPOSTER. Has she not come down yet?

THE OFFICER. Not yet, but she will soon be here--Do you know
what is behind that door, Billposter?

THE BILLPOSTER. No, I have never seen that door open yet.

THE OFFICER. I am going to telephone for a locksmith to come and
open it. [_Goes into the lodge_.

      [THE BILLPOSTER _posts a bill and goes toward the
      right_.

THE DAUGHTER. What is the matter with the dipnet?

THE BILLPOSTER. Matter? Well, I don't know as there is anything
the matter with it--but it just didn't turn out as I had
expected, and the pleasure of it was not so much after all.

THE DAUGHTER. How did you expect it to be?

THE BILLPOSTER. How?--Well, I couldn't tell exactly----

THE DAUGHTER. I can tell you! You had expected it to be what it
was not. It had to be green, but not that kind of green.

THE BILLPOSTER. You have it, madam. You understand it all--and
that is why everybody goes to you with his worries. If you would
only listen to me a little also----

THE DAUGHTER. Of course, I will!--Come in to me and pour out
your heart. [_She goes into the lodge_.

      [THE BILLPOSTER _remains outside, speaking to her.
      The stage is darkened again. When the light is turned
      on, the tree has resumed its leaves, the monk's-hood
      is blooming once more, and the sun is shining on the
      green space beyond the passageway_.

      THE OFFICER _enters. Now he is old and white-haired,
      ragged, and wearing worn-out shoes. He carries the
      bare remnants of the rose stems. Walks to and fro
      slowly, with the gait of an aged man. Reads on the
      posted bill_.

      A BALLET GIRL _comes in from the right_.

THE OFFICER. Is Miss Victoria gone?

THE BALLET GIRL. No, she has not gone yet.

THE OFFICER. Then I shall wait. She will be coming soon, don't
you think?

THE BALLET GIRL. Oh, yes, I am sure.

THE OFFICER. Don't go away now, for I have sent word to the
locksmith, so you will soon see what is behind that door.

THE BALLET GIRL. Oh, it will be awfully interesting to see that
door opened. That door, there, and the Growing Castle--have you
heard of the Growing Castle?

THE OFFICER. Have I?--I have been a prisoner in it.

THE BALLET GIRL. No, was that you? But why do they keep such a
lot of horses there?

THE OFFICER. Because it is a stable castle, don't you know.

THE BALLET GIRL. [_With confusion_] How stupid of me not to
guess that!

      A MALE CHORUS SINGER _enters from the right_.

THE OFFICER. Has Miss Victoria gone yet?

THE CHORUS SINGER. [_Earnestly_] No, she has not. She never goes
away.

THE OFFICER. That is because she loves me--See here, don't go
before the locksmith comes to open the door here.

THE CHORUS SINGER. No, is the door going to be opened? Well,
that will be fun!--I just want to ask the Portress something.

      THE PROMPTER enters from the right.

THE OFFICER. Is Miss Victoria gone yet?

THE PROMPTER. Not that I know of.

THE OFFICER. Now, didn't I tell you she was waiting for
me!--Don't go away, for the door is going to be opened.

THE PROMPTER. Which door?

THE OFFICER. Is there more than one door?

THE PROMPTER. Oh, I know--that one with the clover leaf. Well,
then I have got to stay--I am only going to have a word with
the Portress.

      THE BALLET GIRL, THE CHORUS SINGER, and THE PROMPTER
      gather beside THE BILLPOSTER in front of the lodge
      window and talk by turns to THE DAUGHTER.

      THE GLAZIER enters through the gate.

THE OFFICER. Are you the locksmith?

THE GLAZIER. No, the locksmith had visitors, and a glazier will
do just as well.

THE OFFICER. Yes, of course, of course--but did you bring your
diamond along?

THE GLAZIER. Why, certainly!--A glazier without his diamond,
what would that be?

THE OFFICER. Nothing at all!--Let us get to work then.

      [_Claps his hands together_.

      ALL _gather in a ring around the door_.

      _Male members of the chorus dressed as Master Singers
      and Ballet Girls in costumes from the opera "Aïda"
      enter from the right and join the rest_.

THE OFFICER. Locksmith--or glazier--do your duty!

      THE GLAZIER _goes up to the door with the diamond in
      his hand_.

THE OFFICER. A moment like this will not occur twice in a man's
life. For this reason, my friends, I ask you--please consider
carefully----

A POLICEMAN. [_Enters_] In the name of the law, I forbid the
opening of that door!

THE OFFICER. Oh, Lord! What a fuss there is as soon as anybody
wants to do anything new or great. But we will take the matter
into court--let us go to the Lawyer. Then we shall see whether
the laws still exist or not--Come along to the Lawyer.

      _Without lowering of the curtain, the stage changes
      to a lawyer's office, and in this manner. The gate
      remains, but as a wicket in the railing running clear
      across the stage. The gatekeeper's lodge turns into
      the private enclosure of the Lawyer, and it is now
      entirely open to the front. The linden, leafless,
      becomes a hat tree. The billboard is covered with
      legal notices and court decisions. The door with the
      four-leaved clover hole forms part of a document
      chest_.

      THE LAWYER, _in evening dress and white necktie, is
      found sitting to the left, inside the gate, and in
      front of him stands a desk covered with papers. His
      appearance indicates enormous sufferings. His face
      is chalk-white and full of wrinkles, and its shadows
      have a purple effect. He is ugly, and his features
      seem to reflect all the crimes and vices with which
      he has been forced by his profession to come into
      contact_.

      _Of his two clerks, one has lost an arm, the other an
      eye_.

      _The people gathered to witness "the opening of the
      door" remain as before, bid they appear now to be
      waiting for an audience with the Lawyer. Judging
      by their attitudes, one would think they had been
      standing there forever_.

      THE DAUGHTER, _still wearing the shawl, and_ THE
      OFFICER _are near the footlights_.

THE LAWYER. [Goes _over to_ THE DAUGHTER] Tell me, sister, can
I have that shawl? I shall keep it here until I have a fire in
my grate, and then I shall burn it with all its miseries and
sorrows.

THE DAUGHTER. Not yet, brother. I want it to hold all it
possibly can, and I want it above all to take up your agonies
--all the confidences you have received about crime, vice,
robbery, slander, abuse----

THE LAWYER. My dear girl, for such a purpose your shawl would
prove totally insufficient. Look at these walls. Does it not
look as if the wall-paper itself had been soiled by every
conceivable sin? Look at these documents into which I write
tales of wrong. Look at myself--No smiling man ever comes here;
nothing is to be seen here but angry glances, snarling lips,
clenched fists--And everybody pours his anger, his envy, his
suspicions, upon me. Look--my hands are black, and no washing
will clean them. See how they are chapped and bleeding--I can
never wear my clothes more than a few days because they smell
of other people's crimes--At times I have the place fumigated
with sulphur, but it does not help. I sleep near by, and I
dream of nothing but crimes--Just now I have a murder case in
court--oh, I can stand that, but do you know what is worse than
anything else?--That is to separate married people! Then it is
as if something cried way down in the earth and up there in the
sky--as if it cried treason against the primal force, against
the source of all good, against love--And do you know, when
reams of paper have been filled with mutual accusations, and at
last a sympathetic person takes one of the two apart and asks,
with a pinch of the ear or a smile, the simple question: what
have you really got against your husband?--or your wife?--then
he, or she, stands perplexed and cannot give the cause.
Once--well, I think a lettuce salad was the principal issue;
another time it was just a word--mostly it is nothing at all.
But the tortures, the sufferings--these I have to bear--See how
I look! Do you think I could ever win a woman's love with this
countenance so like a criminal's? Do you think anybody dares to
be friendly with me, who has to collect all the debts, all the
money obligations, of the whole city?--It is a misery to be man!

THE DAUGHTER. Men are to be pitied!

THE LAWYER. They are. And what people are living on puzzles me.
They marry on an income of two thousand, when they need four
thousand. They borrow, of course--everybody borrows. In some
sort of happy-go-lucky fashion, by the skin of their teeth, they
manage to pull through--and thus it continues to the end, when
the estate is found to be bankrupt. Who pays for it at last no
one can tell.

THE DAUGHTER. Perhaps He who feeds the birds.

THE LAWYER. Perhaps. But if He who feeds the birds would only
pay a visit to this earth of His and see for Himself how the
poor human creatures fare--then His heart would surely fill with
compassion.

THE DAUGHTER. Men are to be pitied!

THE LAWYER. Yes, that is the truth!--[_To_ THE OFFICER] What do
you want?

THE OFFICER. I just wanted to ask if Miss Victoria has gone yet.

THE LAWYER. No, she has not; you can be sure of it--Why are you
poking at my chest over there?

THE OFFICER. I thought the door of it looked exactly----

THE LAWYER. Not at all! Not at all!

      _All the church bells begin to ring_.

THE OFFICER. Is there going to be a funeral?

THE LAWYER. No, it is graduation day--a number of degrees will
be conferred, and I am going to be made a Doctor of Laws.
Perhaps you would also like to be graduated and receive a laurel
wreath?

THE OFFICER. Yes, why not. That would be a diversion, at least.

THE LAWYER. Perhaps then we may begin upon this solemn function
at once--But you had better go home and change your clothes.

      [THE OFFICER _goes out_.

      _The stage is darkened and the following changes are
      made. The railing stays, but it encloses now the
      chancel of a church. The billboard displays hymn
      numbers. The linden hat tree becomes a candelabrum.
      The Lawyer's desk is turned into the desk of the
      presiding functionary, and the door with the clover
      leaf leads to the vestry_.

      _The chorus of Master Singers become heralds with
      staffs, and the Ballet Girls carry laurel wreaths.
      The rest of the people act as spectators_.

      _The background is raised, and the new one thus
      discovered represents a large church organ, with the
      keyboards below and the organist's mirror above_.

      _Music is heard. At the sides stand figures
      symbolising the four academic faculties: Philosophy,
      Theology, Medicine, and Jurisprudence_.

      _At first the stage is empty for a few moments_.

      HERALDS _enter from the right_.

      BALLET GIRLS _follow with laurel wreaths carried high
      before them_.

      THREE GRADUATES _appear one after another from the
      left, receive their wreaths from the_ BALLET GIRLS,
      _and go out to the right_.

      THE LAWYER _steps forward to get his wreath_.

      The BALLET GIRLS _turn away from him and refuse to
      place the wreath on his head. Then they withdraw from
      the stage_.

      THE LAWYER, _shocked, leans against a column. All
      the others withdraw gradually until only_ THE LAWYER
      _remains on the stage_.

THE DAUGHTER. [_Enters, her head and shoulders covered by a
white veil_] Do you see, I have washed the shawl! But why are
you standing there? Did you get your wreath?

THE LAWYER. No, I was not held worthy.

THE DAUGHTER. Why? Because you have defended the poor, put in a
good word for the wrong-doing, made the burden easier for the
guilty, obtained a respite for the condemned? Woe upon men: they
are not angels--but they are to be pitied!

THE LAWYER. Say nothing evil of men--for after all it is my task
to voice their side.

THE DAUGHTER. [_Leaning against the organ_] Why do they strike
their friends in the face?

THE LAWYER. They know no better.

THE DAUGHTER. Let us enlighten them. Will you try? Together with
me?

THE LAWYER. They do not accept enlightenment--Oh, that our
plaint might reach the gods of heaven!

THE DAUGHTER. It shall reach the throne--[_Turns toward the
organ_] Do you know what I see in this mirror?--The world turned
the right way!--Yes indeed, for naturally we see it upside down.

THE LAWYER. How did it come to be turned the wrong way?

THE DAUGHTER. When the copy was taken----

THE LAWYER. You have said it! The copy--I have always had the
feeling that it was a spoiled copy. And when I began to recall
the original images, I grew dissatisfied with everything. But
men called it soreheadedness, looking at the world through the
devil's eyes, and other such things.

THE DAUGHTER. It is certainly a crazy world! Look at the four
faculties here. The government, to which has fallen the task
of preserving society, supports all four of them. Theology,
the science of God, is constantly attacked and ridiculed by
philosophy, which declares itself to be the sum of all wisdom.
And medicine is always challenging philosophy, while refusing
entirely to count theology a science and even insisting on
calling it a mere superstition. And they belong to a common
Academic Council, which has been set to teach the young
respect--for the university. It is a bedlam. And woe unto him
who first recovers his reason!

THE LAWYER. Those who find it out first are the theologians. As
a preparatory study, they take philosophy, which teaches them
that theology is nonsense. Later they learn from theology that
philosophy is nonsense. Madmen, I should say!

THE DAUGHTER. And then there is jurisprudence which serves all
but the servants.

THE LAWYER. Justice, which, when it wants to do right, becomes
the undoing of men. Equity, which so often turns into iniquity!

THE DAUGHTER. What a mess you have made of it, you man-children.
Children, indeed!--Come here, and I will give you a wreath--one
that is more becoming to you. [_Puts a crown of thorns on his
head_] And now I will play for you.

_She sits down at the keyboards, but instead of organ-notes
human voices are heard_.

VOICES OF CHILDREN. O Lord everlasting!

      [_Last note sustained_.

VOICES OF WOMEN. Have mercy upon us!

      [_Last note sustained_.

VOICES OF MEN. [_Tenors_] Save us for Thy mercy's sake!

      [_Last note sustained_.

VOICES OF MEN. [Basses] Spare Thy children, O Lord, and deliver
us from Thy wrath!

ALL. Have mercy upon us! Hear us! Have pity upon the mortals!--?
O Lord eternal, why art Thou afar?--Out of the depths we call
unto Thee: Make not the burden of Thy children too heavy! Hear
us! Hear us!

      _The stage turns dark_. THE DAUGHTER _rises and draws
      close to_ THE LAWYER. _By a change of light, the
      organ becomes Fingal's Cave. The ground-swell of the
      ocean, which can be seen rising and falling between
      the columns of basalt, produces a deep harmony that
      blends the music of winds and waves_.

THE LAWYER. Where are we, sister?

THE DAUGHTER. What do you hear?

THE LAWYER. I hear drops falling----

THE DAUGHTER. Those are the tears that men are weeping--What
more do you hear?

THE LAWYER. There is sighing--and whining--and wailing----

THE DAUGHTER. Hither the plaint of the mortals has reached--and
no farther. But why this never-ending wailing? Is there then
nothing in life to rejoice at?

THE LAWYER. Yes, what is most sweet, and what is also most
bitter--love--wife and home--the highest and the lowest!

THE DAUGHTER. May I try it?

THE LAWYER. With me?

THE DAUGHTER. With you--You know the rocks, the
stumbling-stones. Let us avoid them.

THE LAWYER. I am so poor.

THE DAUGHTER. What does that matter if we only love each other?
And a little beauty costs nothing.

THE LAWYER. I have dislikes which may prove your likes.

THE DAUGHTER. They can be adjusted.

THE LAWYER. And if we tire of it?

THE DAUGHTER. Then come the children and bring with them a
diversion that remains for ever new.

THE LAWYER. You, you will take me, poor and ugly, scorned and
rejected?

THE DAUGHTER. Yes--let us unite our destinies.

THE LAWYER. So be it then!

_Curtain_.


[Footnote 1: Though the author says nothing about it here,
subsequent stage directions indicate a door and a window behind
the place occupied by THE PORTRESS. Both lead into her room or
lodge, which contains a telephone.]

[Footnote 2: A floating wooden box with holes in it used to hold
fish.]



      _An extremely plain room inside_ THE LAWYER's
      _office. To the right, a big double bed covered by
      a canopy and curtained in. Next to it, a window. To
      the left, an iron heater with cooking utensils on top
      of it_. CHRISTINE _is pasting paper strips along the
      cracks of the double windows. In the background, an
      open door to the office. Through the door are visible
      a number of poor clients waiting for admission_.

CHRISTINE. I paste, I paste.

THE DAUGHTER. [_Pale and emaciated, sits by the stove_] You shut
out all the air. I choke!

CHRISTINE. Now there is only one little crack left.

THE DAUGHTER. Air, air--I cannot breathe!

CHRISTINE. I paste, I paste.

THE LAWYER. That's right, Christine! Heat is expensive.

THE DAUGHTER. Oh, it feels as if my lips were being glued
together.

THE LAWYER. [_Standing in the doorway, with a paper in his
hand_] Is the child asleep?

THE DAUGHTER. Yes, at last.

THE LAWYER. [_Gently_] All this crying scares away my clients.

THE DAUGHTER. [_Pleasantly_] What can be done about it?

THE LAWYER. Nothing.

THE DAUGHTER. We shall have to get a larger place.

THE LAWYER. We have no money for it.

THE DAUGHTER. May I open the window--this bad air is suffocating.

THE LAWYER. Then the heat escapes, and we shall be cold.

THE DAUGHTER. It is horrible!--May we clean up out there?

THE LAWYER. You have not the strength to do any cleaning, nor
have I, and Christine must paste. She must put strips through
the whole house, on every crack, in the ceiling, in the floor,
in the walls.

THE DAUGHTER. Poverty I was prepared for, but not for dirt.

THE LAWYER. Poverty is always dirty, relatively speaking.

THE DAUGHTER. This is worse than I dreamed!

THE LAWYER. We are not the worst off by far. There is still food
in the pot.

THE DAUGHTER. But what sort of food?

THE LAWYER. Cabbage is cheap, nourishing, and good to eat.

THE DAUGHTER. For those who like cabbage--to me it is repulsive.

THE LAWYER. Why didn't you say so?

THE DAUGHTER. Because I loved you, I wanted to sacrifice my own
taste.

THE LAWYER. Then I must sacrifice my taste for cabbage to
you--for sacrifices must be mutual.

THE DAUGHTER. What are we to eat, then? Fish? But you hate fish?

THE LAWYER. And it is expensive.

THE DAUGHTER. This is worse than I thought it!

THE LAWYER. [_Kindly_] Yes, you see how hard it is--And the
child that was to become a link and a blessing--it becomes our
ruin.

THE DAUGHTER. Dearest, I die in this air, in this room, with
its backyard view, with its baby cries and endless hours of
sleeplessness, with those people out there, and their whinings,
and bickerings, and incriminations--I shall die here!

THE LAWYER. My poor little flower, that has no light and no
air----

THE DAUGHTER. And you say that people exist who are still worse
off?

THE LAWYER. I belong with the envied ones in this locality.

THE DAUGHTER. Everything else might be borne if I could only
have some beauty in my home.

THE LAWYER. I know you are thinking of flowers--and especially
of heliotropes--but a plant costs half a dollar, which will buy
us six quarts of milk or a peck of potatoes.

THE DAUGHTER. I could gladly get along without food if I could
only have some flowers.

THE LAWYER. There is a kind of beauty that costs nothing--but
the absence of it in the home is worse than any other torture to
a man with a sense for the beautiful.

THE DAUGHTER. What is it?

THE LAWYER. If I tell, you will get angry.

THE DAUGHTER. We have agreed not to get angry.

THE LAWYER. We have agreed--Everything can be over-come, Agnes,
except the short, sharp accents--Do you know them? Not yet!

THE DAUGHTER. They will never be heard between us.

THE LAWYER. Not as far as it lies on me!

THE DAUGHTER. Tell me now.

THE LAWYER. Well--when I come into a room, I look first of all
at the curtains--[_Goes over to the window and straightens
out the curtains_] If they hang like ropes or rags, then I
leave soon. And next I take a glance at the chairs--if they
stand straight along the wall, then I stay. [_Puts a chair
back against the wall_] Finally I look at the candles in their
sticks--if they point this way and that, then the whole house is
askew. [_Straightens up a candle on the chest of drawers_] This
is the kind of beauty, dear heart, that costs nothing.

THE DAUGHTER. _With bent head_] Beware of the short accents,
Axel!

THE LAWYER. They were not short.

THE DAUGHTER. Yes, they were.

THE LAWYER. Well, I'll be----

THE DAUGHTER. What kind of language is that?

THE LAWYER. Pardon me, Agnes! But I have suffered as much from
your lack of orderliness as you have suffered from dirt. And I
have not dared to set things right myself, for when I do so, you
get as angry as if I were reproaching you--ugh! Hadn't we better
quit now?

THE DAUGHTER. It is very difficult to be married--it is more
difficult than anything else. One has to be an angel, I think!

THE LAWYER. I think so, too.

THE DAUGHTER. I fear I shall begin to hate you after this!

THE LAWYER. Woe to us then!--But let us forestall hatred. I
promise never again to speak of any untidiness--although it is
torture to me!

THE DAUGHTER. And I shall eat cabbage though it means agony to
me.

THE LAWYER. A life of common suffering, then! One's pleasure,
the other one's pain!

THE DAUGHTER. Men are to be pitied!

THE LAWYER. You see that?

THE DAUGHTER. Yes, but for heaven's sake, let us avoid the
rocks, now when we know them so well.

THE LAWYER. Let us try! Are we not decent and intelligent
persons? Able to forbear and forgive?

THE DAUGHTER. Why not smile at mere trifles?

THE LAWYER. We--only we--can do so. Do you know, I read this
morning--by the bye, where is the newspaper?

THE DAUGHTER. [_Embarrassed_] Which newspaper?

THE LAWYER. [_Sharply_] Do I keep more than one?

THE DAUGHTER. Smile now, and don't speak sharply--I used your
paper to make the fire with----

THE LAWYER. [_Violently_] Well, I'll be damned!

THE DAUGHTER. Why don't you smile?--I burned it because it
ridiculed what is holy to me.

THE LAWYER. Which is unholy to me! Yah! [_Strikes one clenched
fist against the open palm of the other hand_] I smile, I smile
so that my wisdom teeth show--Of course, I am to be nice, and I
am to swallow my own opinions, and say yes to everything, and
cringe and dissemble! [_Tidies the curtains around the bed_]
That's it! Now I am going to fix things until you get angry
again--Agnes, this is simply impossible!

THE DAUGHTER. Of course it is!

THE LAWYER. And yet we must endure--not for the sake of our
promises, but for the sake of the child!

THE DAUGHTER. You are right--for the sake of the child. Oh,
oh--we have to endure!

THE LAWYER. And now I must go out to my clients. Listen to
them--how they growl with impatience to tear each other, to get
each other fined and jailed--Lost souls!

THE DAUGHTER. Poor, poor people! And this pasting!

      [_She drops her head forward in dumb despair_.

CHRISTINE. I paste, I paste.

      THE LAWYER _stands at the door, twisting the
      door-knob nervously_.

THE DAUGHTER. How that knob squeaks! It is as if you were
twisting my heart-strings----

THE LAWYER. I twist, I twist!

THE DAUGHTER. Don't!

THE LAWYER. I twist!

THE DAUGHTER. No!

THE LAWYER. I----

THE OFFICER. [_In the office, on the other side of the door,
takes hold of the knob_] Will you permit me?

THE LAWYER. [_Lets go his hold_] By all means. Seeing that you
have your degree!

THE OFFICER. Now all life belongs to me. Every road lies open.
I have mounted Parnassus. The laurel is won. Immortality, fame,
all is mine!

THE LAWYER. And what are you going to live on?

THE OFFICER. Live on?

THE LAWYER. You must have a home, clothes, food----

THE OFFICER. Oh, that will come--if you can only find somebody
to love you!

THE LAWYER. You don't say so!--You don't--Paste, Christine,
paste until they cannot breathe!

      [_Goes out backward, nodding_.

CHRISTINE. I paste, I paste--until they cannot breathe.

THE OFFICER. Will you come with me now?

THE DAUGHTER. At once! But where?

THE OFFICER. To Fairhaven. There it is summer; there the sun is
shining; there we find youth, children, and flowers, singing and
dancing, feasting and frolicking.

THE DAUGHTER. Then I will go there.

THE OFFICER. Come!

THE LAWYER. [_Enters again_] Now I go back to my first
hell--this was the second and greater. The sweeter the hell, the
greater--And look here, now she has been dropping hair-pins on
the floor again. [_He picks up some hair-pins_.

THE OFFICER. My! but he has discovered the pins also.

THE LAWYER. Also?--Look at this one. You see two prongs, but it
is only one pin. It is two, yet only one. If I bend it open, it
is a single piece. If I bend it back, there are two, but they
remain one for all that. It means: these two are one. But if I
break--like this!--then they become two.

      [_Breaks the pin and throws the pieces away_.

THE OFFICER. All that he has seen!--But before breaking, the
prongs must diverge. If they point together, then it holds.

THE LAWYER. And if they are parallel, then they will never
meet--and it neither breaks nor holds.

THE OFFICER. The hair-pin is the most perfect of all created
things. A straight line which equals two parallel ones.

THE LAWYER. A lock that shuts when it is open.

THE OFFICER. And thus shuts in a braid of hair that opens up
when the lock shuts.

THE LAWYER. It is like this door. When I close it, then I
open--the way out--for you, Agnes!

      [_Withdraws and closes the door behind him_.

THE DAUGHTER. Well then?

      _The stage changes. The bed with its curtains becomes
      a tent_.

      _The stove stays as it was. The background is
      raised. To the right, in the foreground, are seen
      hills stripped of their trees by fire, and red
      heather growing between the blackened tree stumps.
      Red-painted pig-sties and outhouses. Beyond these, in
      the open, apparatus for mechanical gymnastics, where
      sick persons are being treated on machines resembling
      instruments of torture_.

      _To the left, in the foreground, the quarantine
      station, consisting of open sheds, with ovens,
      furnaces, and pipe coils_.

      _In the middle distance, a narrow strait_.

      _The background shows a beautiful wooded shore. Flags
      are flying on its piers, where ride white sailboats,
      some with sails set and some without. Little Italian
      villas, pavilions, arbors, marble statues are
      glimpsed through the foliage along the shore_.

      THE MASTER OF QUARANTINE, _made up like a blackamoor,
      is walking along the shore_.

THE OFFICER. [_Meets him and they shake hands_] Why,
Ordström![3] Have you landed here?

MASTER OF Q. Yes, here I am.

THE OFFICER. Is this Fairhaven?

MASTER OF Q. No, that is on the other side. This is Foulstrand.

THE OFFICER. Then we have lost our way.

MASTER OF Q. We?--Won't you introduce me?

THE OFFICER. No, that wouldn't do. [_In a lowered voice_] It is
Indra's own daughter.

MASTER OF Q. Indra's? And I was thinking of Varuna
himself--Well, are you not surprised to find me black in the
face?

THE OFFICER. I am past fifty, my boy, and at that age one has
ceased to be surprised. I concluded at once that you were bound
for some fancy ball this afternoon.

MASTER OF Q. Right you were! And I hope both of you will come
along.

THE OFFICER. Why, yes--for I must say--the place does not look
very tempting. What kind of people live here anyhow?

MASTER OF Q. Here you find the sick; over there, the healthy.

THE OFFICER. Nothing but poor folk on this side, I suppose.

MASTER OF Q. No, my boy, it is here you find the rich. Look at
that one on the rack. He has stuffed himself with paté de foie
gras and truffles and Burgundy until his feet have grown knotted.

THE OFFICER. Knotted?

MASTER OF Q. Yes, he has a case of knotted feet. And that one
who lies under the guillotine--he has swilled brandy so that his
backbone has to be put through the mangle.

THE OFFICER. There is always something amiss!

MASTER OF Q. Moreover, everybody living on this side has some
kind of canker to hide. Look at the fellow coming here, for
instance.

_An old dandy is pushed on the stage in a wheel-chair, he is
accompanied by a gaunt and grisly coquette in the sixties, to
whom_ THE FRIEND, _a man of about forty, is paying court_.

THE OFFICER. It is the major--our schoolmate!

MASTER OF Q. Don Juan. Can you see that he is still enamored of
that old spectre beside him? He does not notice that she has
grown old, or that she is ugly, faithless, cruel.

THE OFFICER. Why, that is love! And I couldn't have dreamt that
a fickle fellow like him would prove capable of loving so deeply
and so earnestly.

MASTER OF Q. That is a mighty decent way of looking at it.

THE OFFICER. I have been in love with Victoria myself--in fact I
am still waiting for her in the passageway----

MASTER OF Q. Oh, you are the fellow who is waiting in the
passageway?

THE OFFICER. I am the man.

MASTER OF Q. Well, have you got that door opened yet?

THE OFFICER. No, the case is still in court--THE BILLPOSTER is
out with his dipnet, of course, so that the taking of evidence
is always being put off--and in the meantime the Glazier has
mended all the window panes in the castle, which has grown half
a story higher--This has been an uncommonly good year--warm and
wet----

MASTER OF Q. But just the same you have had no heat comparing
with what I have here.

THE OFFICER. How much do you have in your ovens?

MASTER OF Q. When we fumigate cholera suspects, we run it up to
one hundred and forty degrees.

THE OFFICER. Is the cholera going again?

MASTER OF Q. Don't you know that?

THE OFFICER. Of course, I know it, but I forget so often what I
know.

MASTER OF Q. I wish often that I could forget--especially
myself. That is why I go in for masquerades and carnivals and
amateur theatricals.

THE OFFICER. What have you been up to then?

MASTER OF Q. If I told, they would say that I was boasting; and
if I don't tell, then they call me a hypocrite.

THE OFFICER. That is why you blackened your face?

MASTER OF Q. Exactly--making myself a shade blacker than I am.

THE OFFICER. Who is coming there?

MASTER OF Q. Oh, a poet who is going to have his mud bath.

      THE POET _enters with his eyes raised toward the sky
      and carrying a pail of mud in one hand_.

THE OFFICER. Why, he ought to be having light baths and air
baths.

MASTER OF Q. No, he is roaming about the higher regions so much
that he gets homesick for the mud--and wallowing in the mire
makes the skin callous like that of a pig. Then he cannot feel
the stings of the wasps.

THE OFFICER. This is a queer world, full of contradictions.

THE POET. [_Ecstatically_] Man was created by the god Phtah out
of clay on a potter's wheel, or a lathe--[_sceptically_], or any
damned old thing! [_Ecstatically_] Out of clay does the sculptor
create his more or less immortal masterpieces--[_sceptically_],
which mostly are pure rot. [_Ecstatically_] Out of clay they
make those utensils which are so indispensable in the pantry and
which generically are named pots and plates--[_sceptically_],
but what in thunder does it matter to me what they are called
anyhow? [_Ecstatically_] Such is the clay! When clay becomes
fluid, it is called mud--C'est mon affaire!--[_shouts_] Lena!

      Lena _enters with a pail in her hand_.

THE POET. Lena, show yourself to Miss Agnes--She knew you
ten years ago, when you were a young, happy and, let us say,
pretty girl--Behold how she looks now. Five children, drudgery,
baby-cries, hunger, ill-treatment. See how beauty has perished
and joy vanished in the fulfilment of duties which should have
brought that inner satisfaction which makes each line in the
face harmonious and fills the eye with a quiet glow.

MASTER OF Q. [_Covering the poet's mouth with his hand_] Shut
up! Shut up!

THE POET. That is what they all say. And if you keep silent,
then they cry: speak! Oh, restless humanity!

THE DAUGHTER. [_Goes to_ Lena] Tell me your troubles.

LENA. No, I dare not, for then they will be made worse.

THE DAUGHTER. Who could be so cruel?

LENA. I dare not tell, for if I do, I shall be spanked.

THE POET. That is just what will happen. But I will speak, even
though the blackamoor knock out all my teeth--I will tell that
justice is not always done--Agnes, daughter of the gods, do you
hear music and dancing on the hill over there?--Well, it is
Lena's sister who has come home from the city where she went
astray--you understand? Now they are killing the fatted calf;
but Lena, who stayed at home, has to carry slop pails and feed
the pigs.

THE DAUGHTER. There is rejoicing at home because the stray has
left the paths of evil, and not merely because she has come
back. Bear that in mind.

THE POET. But then they should give a ball and banquet every
night for the spotless worker that never strayed into paths of
error--Yet they do nothing of the kind, but when Lena has a free
moment, she is sent to prayer-meetings where she has to hear
reproaches for not being perfect. Is this justice?

THE DAUGHTER. Your question is so difficult to answer
because--There are so many unforeseen cases THE POET. That much
the Caliph, Haroun the Just, came to understand. He was sitting
on his throne, and from its height he could never make out what
happened below. At last complaints penetrated to his exalted
ears. And then, one fine day, he disguised himself and descended
unobserved among the crowds to find out what kind of justice
they were getting.

THE DAUGHTER. I hope you don't take me for Haroun the Just!

THE OFFICER. Let us talk of something else--Here come visitors.

_A white boat, shaped like a viking ship, with a dragon for
figure-head, with a pale-blue silken sail on a gilded yard, and
with a rose-red standard flying from the top of a gilded mast,
glides through the strait from the left._ He _and_ She _are
seated in the stern with their arms around each other_.

THE OFFICER. Behold perfect happiness, bliss without limits,
young love's rejoicing!

      _The stage grows brighter_.

HE. [_Stands up in the boat and sings_]

Hail, beautiful haven,
Where the Springs of my youth were spent,
Where my first sweet dreams were dreamt--
To thee I return,
But lonely no longer!
Ye hills and groves,
Thou sky o'erhead,
Thou mirroring sea,
Give greeting to her:
My love, my bride,
My light and my life!

      _The flags at the landings of Fairhaven are dipped in
      salute; white handkerchiefs are waved from verandahs
      and boats, and the air is filled with tender chords
      from harps and violins_.

THE POET. See the light that surrounds them! Hear how the air is
ringing with music!--Eros!

THE OFFICER. It is Victoria.

MASTER OF Q. Well, what of it?

THE OFFICER. It is his Victoria--My own is still mine. And
nobody can see _her_--Now you hoist the quarantine flag, and I
shall pull in the net.

[The MASTER OF QUARANTINE _waves a yellow flag._ THE OFFICER.
[_Pulling a rope that turns the boat toward Foulstrand_] Hold on
there!

      HE _and_ SHE _become aware of the hideous view and
      give vent to their horror_.

MASTER OF Q. Yes, it comes hard. But here every one must stop
who hails from plague-stricken places.

THE POET. The idea of speaking in such manner, of acting in such
a way, within the presence of two human beings united in love!
Touch them not! Lay not hands on love! It is treason!--Woe to
us! Everything beautiful must now be dragged down--dragged into
the mud!

      [HE _and_ SHE _step ashore, looking sad and
      shamefaced_.

HE. Woe to us! What have we done?

MASTER OF Q. It is not necessary to have done anything in order
to encounter life's little pricks.

SHE. So short-lived are joy and happiness!

HE. How long must we stay here?

MASTER OF Q. Forty days and nights.

SHE. Then rather into the water!

HE. To live here--among blackened hills and pig-sties?

THE POET. Love overcomes all, even sulphur fumes and carbolic
acid.

MASTER OF Q. [_Starts a fire in the stove; blue, sulphurous
flames break forth_] Now I set the sulphur going. Will you
please step in?

SHE. Oh, my blue dress will fade.

MASTER OF Q. And become white. So your roses will also turn
white in time.

HE. Even your cheeks--in forty days!

SHE. [_To_ The OFFICER] That will please you.

THE OFFICER. No, it will not!--Of course, your happiness was
the cause of my suffering, but--it doesn't matter--for I am
graduated and have obtained a position over there--heigh-ho
and alas! And in the Fall I shall be teaching school--teaching
boys the same lessons I myself learned during my childhood and
youth--the same lessons throughout my manhood and, finally, in
my old age--the self-same lessons! What does twice two make?
How many times can four be evenly divided by two?--Until I
get a pension and can do nothing at all--just wait around for
meals and the newspapers--until at last I am carted to the
crematorium and burned to ashes--Have you nobody here who is
entitled to a pension? Barring twice two makes four, it is
probably the worst thing of all--to begin school all over again
when one already is graduated; to ask the same questions until
death comes----

      _An elderly man goes by, with his hands folded behind
      his back_.

THE OFFICER. There is a pensioner now, waiting for himself to
die. I think he must be a captain who missed the rank of major;
or an assistant judge who was not made a chief justice. Many are
called but few are chosen--He is waiting for his breakfast now.

THE PENSIONER. No, for the newspaper--the morning paper.

THE OFFICER. And he is only fifty-four years old. He may spend
twenty-five more years waiting for meals and newspapers--is it
not dreadful?

THE PENSIONER. What is not dreadful? Tell me, tell me!

THE OFFICER. Tell that who can!--Now I shall have to teach
boys that twice two makes four. And how many times four can be
evenly divided by two. [_He clutches his head in despair_] And
Victoria, whom I loved and therefore wished all the happiness
life can give--now she has her happiness, the greatest one known
to her, and for this reason I suffer--suffer, suffer!

SHE. Do you think I can be happy when I see you suffering? How
can you think it? Perhaps it will soothe your pains that I am to
be imprisoned here for forty days and nights? Tell me, does it
soothe your pains?

THE OFFICER. Yes and no. How can I enjoy seeing you suffer? Oh!

SHE. And do you think my happiness can be founded on your
torments?

THE OFFICER. We are to be pitied--all of us!

ALL. [_Raise their arms toward the sky and utter a cry of
anguish that sounds like a dissonant chord_] Oh!

THE DAUGHTER. Everlasting One, hear them! Life is evil! Men are
to be pitied!

ALL. [_As before_] Oh!

      _For a moment the stage is completely darkened, and
      during that moment everybody withdraws or takes up
      a new position. When the light is turned on again,
      Foulstrand is seen in the background, lying in deep
      shadow. The strait is in the middle distance and
      Fairhaven in the foreground, both steeped in light.
      To the right, a corner of the Casino, where dancing
      couples are visible through the open windows. Three
      servant maids are standing outside on top of an empty
      box, with arms around each other, staring at the
      dancers within. On the verandah of the Casino stands
      a bench, where_ "Plain" EDITH _is sitting. She is
      bare-headed, with an abundance of tousled hair, and
      looks sad. In front of her is an open piano_.

      _To the left, a frame house painted yellow. Two
      children in light dresses are playing ball outside_.

      _In the centre of the middle distance, a pier with
      white sailboats tied to it, and flag poles with
      hoisted flags. In the strait is anchored a naval
      vessel, brig-rigged, with gun ports. But the entire
      landscape is in winter dress, with snow on the ground
      and on the bare trees_.

      THE DAUGHTER _and_ THE OFFICER _enter_.

THE DAUGHTER. Here is peace, and happiness, and leisure. No more
toil; every day a holiday; everybody dressed up in their best;
dancing and music in the early morning. [_To the maids_] Why
don't you go in and have a dance, girls?

THE MAIDS. We?

THE OFFICER. They are servants, don't you see!

THE DAUGHTER. Of course!--But why is Edith sitting there instead
of dancing?

      [EDITH _buries her face in her hands_.

THE OFFICER. Don't question her! She has been sitting there
three hours without being asked for a dance.

      [_Goes into the yellow house on the left_.

THE DAUGHTER. What a cruel form of amusement!

THE MOTHER. [_In a low-necked dress, enters from the Casino and
goes up to_ EDITH] Why don't you go in as I told you?

EDITH. Because--I cannot throw myself at them. That I am ugly, I
know, and I know that nobody wants to dance with me, but I might
be spared from being reminded of it.

      _Begins to play on the piano, the Toccata Con Fuga,
      Op_. 10, by Sebastian Bach.

[Illustration: music.]

      _The waltz music from within is heard faintly at
      first. Then it grows in strength, as if to compete
      with the Bach Toccata_. EDITH _prevails over it and
      brings it to silence. Dancers appear in the doorway
      to hear her play. Everybody on the stage stands still
      and listens reverently_.

A NAVAL OFFICER. [_Takes_ ALICE, _one of the dancers, around the
waist and drags her toward the pier_] Come quick!

      EDITH _breaks off abruptly, rises and stares at the
      couple with an expression of utter despair; stands as
      if turned to stone_.

      _Now the front wall of the yellow house disappears,
      revealing three benches full of schoolboys. Among
      these_ THE OFFICER _is seen, looking worried and
      depressed. In front of the boys stands_ THE TEACHER,
      _bespectacled and holding a piece of chalk in one
      hand, a rattan cane in the other_.

THE TEACHER. [_To_ THE OFFICER] Well, my boy, can you tell me
what twice two makes?

      THE OFFICER _remains seated while he racks his mind
      without finding an answer_.

THE TEACHER. You must rise when I ask you a question.

THE OFFICER. [_Harassed, rises_] Two--twice--let me see. That
makes two-two.

THE TEACHER. I see! You have not studied your lesson.

THE OFFICER. [_Ashamed_] Yes, I have, but--I know the answer,
but I cannot tell it----

THE TEACHER. You want to wriggle out of it, of course. You know
it, but you cannot tell. Perhaps I may help you.

      [_Pulls his hair_.

THE OFFICER. Oh, it is dreadful, it is dreadful!

THE TEACHER. Yes, it is dreadful that such a big boy lacks all
ambition----

THE OFFICER. [_Hurt_] Big boy--yes, I am big--bigger than all
these others--I am full-grown, I am done with school--[_As if
waking up_] I have graduated--why am I then sitting here? Have I
not received my doctor's degree?

THE TEACHER. Certainly, but you are to sit here and mature, you
know. You have to mature--isn't that so?

THE OFFICER. [_Feels his forehead_] Yes, that is right, one
must mature--Twice two--makes two--and this I can demonstrate
by analogy, which is the highest form of all reasoning.
Listen!--Once one makes one; consequently twice two must make
two. For what applies in one case must also apply in another.

THE TEACHER. Your conclusion is based on good logic, but your
answer is wrong.

THE OFFICER. What is logical cannot be wrong. Let us test it.
One divided by one gives one, so that two divided by two must
give two.

THE TEACHER. Correct according to analogy. But how much does
once three make?

THE OFFICER. Three, of course.

THE TEACHER. Consequently twice three must also make three.

THE OFFICER. [_Pondering_] No, that cannot be right--it
cannot--or else--[_Sits down dejectedly_] No, I am not mature
yet.

THE TEACHER. No, indeed, you are far from mature.

THE OFFICER. But how long am I to sit here, then?

THE TEACHER. Here--how long? Do you believe that time and space
exist?--Suppose that time does exist, then you should be able to
say what time is. What is time?

THE OFFICER. Time--[_Thinks_] I cannot tell, but I know what it
is. Consequently I may also know what twice two is without being
able to tell it. And, teacher, can you tell what time is?

THE TEACHER. Of course I can.

ALL THE BOYS. Tell us then!

THE TEACHER. Time--let me see. [_Stands immovable until
one finger on his nose_] While we are talking, time flies.
Consequently time is something that flies while we talk.

A BOY. [_Rising_] Now you are talking, teacher, and while you
are talking, I fly: consequently I am time. [_Runs out_.

THE TEACHER. That accords completely with the laws of logic.

THE OFFICER. Then the laws of logic are silly, for Nils who ran
away, cannot be time.

THE TEACHER. That is also good logic, although it is silly.

THE OFFICER. Then logic itself is silly.

THE TEACHER. So it seems. But if logic is silly, then all the
world is silly--and then the devil himself wouldn't stay here to
teach you more silliness. If anybody treats me to a drink, we'll
go and take a bath.

THE OFFICER. That is a _posterus prius_, or the world turned
upside down, for it is customary to bathe first and have the
drink afterward. Old fogy!

THE TEACHER. Beware of a swelled head, doctor!

THE OFFICER. Call me captain, if you please. I am an officer,
and I cannot understand why I should be sitting here to get
scolded like a schoolboy----

THE TEACHER. [_With raised index finger_] We were to mature!

MASTER OF Q. [_Enters_] The quarantine begins.

THE OFFICER. Oh, there you are. Just think of it, this fellow
makes me sit among the boys although I am graduated.

MASTER OF Q. Well, why don't you go away?

THE OFFICER. Heaven knows!--Go away? Why, that is no easy thing
to do.

THE TEACHER. I guess not--just try!

THE OFFICER. [_To_ MASTER OF QUARANTINE] Save me! Save me from
his eye!

MASTER OF Q. Come on. Come and help us dance--We have to dance
before the plague breaks out. We must!

THE OFFICER. Is the brig leaving?

MASTER OF Q. Yes, first of all the brig must leave--Then there
will be a lot of tears shed, of course.

THE OFFICER. Always tears: when she comes and when she goes--Let
us get out of here.

      _They go out_. THE TEACHER _continues his lesson in
      silence_.

      THE MAIDS _that were staring through the window of
      the dance hall walk sadly down to the pier_. EDITH,
      _who has been standing like a statue at the piano,
      follows them_.

THE DAUGHTER. [_To_ THE OFFICER] Is there not one happy person
to be found in this paradise?

THE OFFICER. Yes, there is a newly married couple. Just watch
them.

      THE NEWLY MARRIED COUPLE _enter_.

HUSBAND. [_To his_ WIFE] My joy has no limits, and I could now
wish to die----

WIFE. Why die?

HUSBAND. Because at the heart of happiness grows the seed of
disaster. Happiness devours itself like a flame--it cannot burn
for ever, but must go out some time. And this presentiment of
the coming end destroys joy in the very hour of its culmination.

WIFE. Let us then die together--this moment!

HUSBAND. Die? All right! For I fear happiness--that cheat!
[_They go toward the water_.

THE DAUGHTER. Life is evil! Men are to be pitied!

THE OFFICER. Look at this fellow. He is the most envied mortal
in this neighbourhood.

      THE BLIND MAN _is led in_.

THE OFFICER. He is the owner of these hundred or more Italian
villas. He owns all these bays, straits, shores, forests,
together with the fishes in the water, the birds in the air,
the game in the woods. These thousand or more people are his
tenants. The sun rises upon his sea and sets upon his land----

THE DAUGHTER. Well--is he complaining also?

THE OFFICER. Yes, and with right, for he cannot see.

MASTER OF Q. He is blind.

THE DAUGHTER. The most envied of all!

THE OFFICER. Now he has come to see the brig depart with his son
on board.

THE BLIND MAN. I cannot see, but I hear. I hear the anchor bill
claw the clay bottom as when the hook is torn out of a fish and
brings up the heart with it through the neck--My son, my only
child, is going to journey across the wide sea to foreign lands,
and I can follow him only in my thought! Now I hear the clanking
of the chain--and--there is something that snaps and cracks like
clothes drying on a line--wet handkerchiefs perhaps. And I hear
it blubber and snivel as when people are weeping--maybe the
splashing of the wavelets among the seines--or maybe girls along
the shore, deserted and disconsolate--Once I asked a child why
the ocean is salt, and the child, which had a father on a long
trip across the high seas, said immediately: the ocean is salt
because the sailors shed so many tears into it. And why do the
sailors cry so much then?--Because they are always going away,
replied the child; and that is why they are always drying their
handkerchiefs in the rigging--And why does man weep when he is
sad? I asked at last--Because the glass in the eyes must be
washed now and then, so that we can see clearly, said the child.

      _The brig has set sail and is gliding off. The
      girls along the shore are alternately waving their
      handkerchiefs and wiping off their tears with them.
      Then a signal is set on the foremast--a red ball in a
      white field, meaning "yes." In response to it_ Alice
      _waves her handkerchief triumphantly_.

THE DAUGHTER. [_To_ THE OFFICER] What is the meaning of that
flag?

THE OFFICER. It means "yes." It is the lieutenant's troth--red
as the red blood of the arteries, set against the blue cloth of
the sky.

THE DAUGHTER. And how does "no" look?

THE OFFICER. It is blue as the spoiled blood in the veins--but
look, how jubilant Alice is.

THE DAUGHTER. And how Edith cries.

THE BLIND MAN. Meet and part. Part and meet. That is life. I met
his mother. And then she went away from me. He was left to me;
and now he goes.

THE DAUGHTER. But he will come back.

THE BLIND MAN. Who is speaking to me? I have heard that voice
before--in my dreams; in my youth, when vacation began; in the
early years of my marriage, when my child was born. Every time
life smiled at me, I heard that voice, like a whisper of the
south wind, like a chord of harps from above, like what I feel
the angels' greeting must be in the Holy Night----

      THE LAWYER _enters and goes up to whisper something
      into_ THE BLIND MAN's _ear_.

THE BLIND MAN. Is that so?

THE LAWYER. That's the truth. [_Goes to_ THE DAUGHTER] Now you
have seen most of it, but you have not yet tried the worst of it.

THE DAUGHTER. What can that be?

THE LAWYER. Repetition--recurrence. To retrace one's own tracks;
to be sent back to the task once finished--come!

THE DAUGHTER. Where?

THE LAWYER. To your duties.

THE DAUGHTER. What does that mean?

THE LAWYER. Everything you dread. Everything you do not want but
must. It means to forego, to give up, to do without, to lack--it
means everything that is unpleasant, repulsive, painful.

THE DAUGHTER. Are there no pleasant duties?

THE LAWYER. They become pleasant when they are done.

THE DAUGHTER. When they have ceased to exist--Duty is then
something unpleasant. What is pleasant then?

THE LAWYER. What is pleasant is sin.

THE DAUGHTER. Sin?

THE LAWYER. Yes, something that has to be punished. If I have
had a pleasant day or night, then I suffer infernal pangs and a
bad conscience the next day.

THE DAUGHTER. How strange!

THE LAWYER. I wake up in the morning with a headache; and then
the repetitions begin, but so that everything becomes perverted.
What the night before was pretty, agreeable, witty, is presented
by memory in the morning as ugly, distasteful, stupid. Pleasure
seems to decay, and all joy goes to pieces. What men call
success serves always as a basis for their next failure. My own
successes have brought ruin upon me. For men view the fortune
of others with an instinctive dread. They regard it unjust that
fate should favour any one man, and so they try to restore
balance by piling rocks on the road. To have talent is to be
in danger of one's life, for then one may easily starve to
death!--However, you will have to return to your duties, or I
shall bring suit against you, and we shall pass through every
court up to the highest--one, two, three!

THE DAUGHTER. Return?--To the iron stove, and the cabbage pot,
and the baby clothes----

THE LAWYER. Exactly! We have a big wash to-day, for we must wash
all the handkerchiefs----

THE DAUGHTER. Oh, must I do it all over again?

THE LAWYER. All life is nothing but doing things over again.
Look at the teacher in there--He received his doctor's degree
yesterday, was laurelled and saluted, climbed Parnassus and was
embraced by the monarch--and to-day he starts school all over
again, asks how much twice two makes, and will continue to do
so until his death--However, you must come back to your home!

THE DAUGHTER. I shall rather die!

THE LAWYER. Die?--That is not allowed. First of all, it is a
disgrace--so much so that even the dead body is subjected to
insults; and secondly, one goes to hell--it is a mortal sin!

THE DAUGHTER. It is not easy to be human!

ALL. Hear!

THE DAUGHTER. I shall not go back with you to humiliation and
dirt--I am longing for the heights whence I came--but first the
door must be opened so that I may learn the secret--It is my
will that the door be opened!

THE LAWYER. Then you must retrace your own steps, cover the road
you have already travelled, suffer all annoyances, repetitions,
tautologies, recopyings, that a suit will bring with it----

THE DAUGHTER. May it come then--But first I must go into the
solitude and the wilderness to recover my own self. We shall
meet again! [_To_ THE POET] Follow me.

      _Cries of anguish are heard from a distance_. Woe!
      Woe! Woe!

THE DAUGHTER. What is that?

THE LAWYER. The lost souls at Foulstrand.

THE DAUGHTER. Why do they wail more loudly than usual to-day?

THE LAWYER. Because the sun is shining here; because here we
have music, dancing, youth. And it makes them feel their own
sufferings more keenly.

THE DAUGHTER. We must set them free.

THE LAWYER. Try it! Once a liberator appeared, and he was nailed
to a cross.

THE DAUGHTER. By whom?

THE LAWYER. By all the right-minded.

THE DAUGHTER. Who are they?

THE LAWYER. Are you not acquainted with all the right-minded?
Then you must learn to know them.

THE DAUGHTER. Were they the ones that prevented your graduation?

THE LAWYER. Yes.

THE DAUGHTER. Then I know them!

_Curtain_.



      _On the shores of the Mediterranean. To the left,
      in the foreground, a white wall, and above it
      branches of an orange tree with ripe fruit on them.
      In the background, villas and a Casino placed on a
      terrace. To the right, a huge pile of coal and two
      wheel-barrows. In the background, to the right, a
      corner of blue sea_.

      _Two coalheavers, naked to the waist, their faces,
      hands, and bodies blackened by coal dust, are seated
      on the wheel-barrows. Their expressions show intense
      despair_.

      THE DAUGHTER _and_ THE LAWYER _in the background_.

THE DAUGHTER. This is paradise!

FIRST COALHEAVER. This is hell!

SECOND COALHEAVER. One hundred and twenty degrees in the shadow.

FIRST HEAVER. Let's have a bath.

SECOND HEAVER. The police won't let us. No bathing here.

FIRST HEAVER. Couldn't we pick some fruit off that tree?

SECOND HEAVER. Then the police would get after us.

FIRST HEAVER. But I cannot do a thing in this heat--I'll just
chuck the job----

SECOND HEAVER. Then the police will get you for sure!--
[_Pause_] And you wouldn't have anything to eat anyhow.

FIRST HEAVER. Nothing to eat? We, who work hardest, get least
food; and the rich, who do nothing, get most. Might one
not--without disregard of truth--assert that this is injustice
--What has the daughter of the gods to say about it?

THE DAUGHTER. I can say nothing at all--But tell me, what have
you done that makes you so black and your lot so hard?

FIRST HEAVER. What have we done? We have been born of poor and
perhaps not very good parents--Maybe we have been punished a
couple of times.

THE DAUGHTER. Punished?

FIRST HEAVER. Yes, the unpunished hang out in the Casino up
there and dine on eight courses with wine.

THE DAUGHTER. [_To_ THE LAWYER] Can that be true?

THE LAWYER. On the whole, yes.

THE DAUGHTER. You mean to say that every man at some time has
deserved to go to prison?

THE LAWYER. Yes.

THE DAUGHTER. You, too?

THE LAWYER. Yes.

THE DAUGHTER. Is it true that the poor cannot bathe in the sea?

THE LAWYER. Yes. Not even with their clothes on. None but those
who intend to take their own lives escape being fined. And those
are said to get a good drubbing at the police station.

THE DAUGHTER. But can they not go outside of the city, out into
the country, and bathe there?

THE LAWYER. There is no place for them--all the land is fenced
in.

THE DAUGHTER. But I mean in the free, open country.

THE LAWYER. There is no such thing--it all belongs to somebody.

THE DAUGHTER. Even the sea, the great, vast sea----

THE LAWYER. Even that! You cannot sail the sea in a boat and
land anywhere without having it put down in writing and charged
for. It is lovely!

THE DAUGHTER. This is not paradise.

THE LAWYER. I should say not!

THE DAUGHTER. Why don't men do something to improve their lot?

THE LAWYER. Oh, they try, of course, but all the improvers end
in prison or in the madhouse----

THE DAUGHTER. Who puts them in prison?

THE LAWYER. All the right-minded, all the respectable----

THE DAUGHTER. Who sends them to the madhouse?

THE LAWYER. Their own despair when they grasp the hopelessness
of their efforts.

THE DAUGHTER. Has the thought not occurred to anybody, that for
secret reasons it must be as it is?

THE LAWYER. Yes, those who are well off always think so.

THE DAUGHTER. That it is all right as it is?

FIRST HEAVER. And yet we are the foundations of society. If the
coal is not unloaded, then there will be no fire in the kitchen
stove, in the parlour grate, or in the factory furnace; then the
light will go out in streets and shops and homes; then darkness
and cold will descend upon you--and, therefore, we have to sweat
as in hell so that the black coals may be had--And what do you
do for us in return?

THE LAWYER. [_To_ THE DAUGHTER] Help them!--[_Pause_] That
conditions cannot be quite the same for everybody, I understand,
but why should they differ so widely?

      A GENTLEMAN _and_ A LADY _pass across the stage_.

THE LADY. Will you come and play a game with us?

THE GENTLEMAN. No, I must take a walk, so I can eat something
for dinner.

FIRST HEAVER. So that he _can_ eat something?

SECOND HEAVER. So that he _can_----?

      _Children enter and cry with horror when they catch
      sight of the grimy workers_.

FIRST HEAVER. They cry when they see us. They cry----

SECOND HEAVER. Damn it all!--I guess we'll have to pull out the
scaffolds soon and begin to operate on this rotten body----

FIRST HEAVER. Damn it, I say, too! [_Spits_.

THE LAWYER. [_To_ THE DAUGHTER] Yes, it is all wrong. And men
are not so very bad--but----

THE DAUGHTER. But----

THE LAWYER. But the government----

THE DAUGHTER. [_Goes out, hiding her face in her hands_] This is
not paradise.

COALHEAVERS. No, hell, that's what it is!

_Curtain_.


[Footnote 3: Means literally "wordspout."]


      _Fingal's Cave. Long green waves are rolling slowly
      into the cave. In the foreground, a siren buoy is
      swaying to and fro in time with the waves, but
      without sounding except at the indicated moment.
      Music of the winds. Music of the waves_.

      THE DAUGHTER _and_ THE POET.

THE POET. Where are you leading me?

THE DAUGHTER. Far away from the noise and lament of the
man-children, to the utmost end of the ocean, to the cave that
we name Indra's Ear because it is the place where the king of
the heavens is said to listen to the complaints of the mortals.

THE POET. What? In this place?

THE DAUGHTER. Do you see how this cave is built like a shell?
Yes, you can see it. Do you know that your ear, too, is built
in the form of a shell? You know it, but have not thought of
it. [_She picks up a shell from the beach_] Have you not as a
child held such a shell to your ear and listened--and heard the
ripple of your heart-blood, the humming of your thoughts in the
brain, the snapping of a thousand little worn-out threads in the
tissues of your body? All that you hear in this small shell.
Imagine then what may be heard in this larger one!

THE POET. [_Listening_] I hear nothing but the whispering of the
wind.

THE DAUGHTER. Then I shall interpret it for you. Listen. The
wail of the winds. [_Recites to subdued music_:

Born beneath the clouds of heaven,
Driven we were by the lightnings of Indra
Down to the sand-covered earth.
Straw from the harvested fields soiled our feet;
Dust from the high-roads,
Smoke from the cities,
Foul-smelling breaths,
Fumes from cellars and kitchens,
All we endured.
Then to the open sea we fled,
Filling our lungs with air,
Shaking our wings,
And laving our feet.

Indra, Lord of the Heavens,
Hear us!
Hear our sighing!
Unclean is the earth;
Evil is life;
Neither good nor bad
Can men be deemed.
As they can, they live,
One day at a time.
Sons of dust, through dust they journey;
Born out of dust, to dust they return.
Given they were, for trudging,
Feet, not wings for flying.
Dusty they grow--
Lies the fault then with them,
Or with Thee?

THE POET. Thus I heard it once----

THE DAUGHTER. Hush! The winds are still singing.

      [_Recites to subdued music_:

We, winds that wander,
We, the air's offspring,
Bear with us men's lament.

Heard us you have
During gloom-filled Fall nights,
In chimneys and pipes,
In key-holes and door cracks,
When the rain wept on the roof:
Heard us you have
In the snowclad pine woods
Midst wintry gloom:
Heard us you have,
Crooning and moaning
In ropes and rigging
On the high-heaving sea.

It was we, the winds,
Offspring of the air,
Who learned how to grieve
Within human breasts
Through which we passed--
In sick-rooms, on battle-fields,
But mostly where the newborn
Whimpered and wailed
At the pain of living.

We, we, the winds,
We are whining and whistling:
Woe! Woe! Woe!

THE POET. It seems to me that I have already----

THE DAUGHTER. Hush! Now the waves are singing.

      [_Recites to subdued music_:

We, we waves,
That are rocking the winds
To rest--
Green cradles, we waves!

Wet are we, and salty;
Leap like flames of fire--
Wet flames are we:
Burning, extinguishing;
Cleansing, replenishing;
Bearing, engendering.

We, we waves,
That are rocking the winds
To rest!

THE DAUGHTER. False waves and faithless! Everything on earth
that is not burned, is drowned--by the waves. Look at this.
[_Pointing to pile of debris_] See what the sea has taken
and spoiled! Nothing but the figure-heads remain of the
sunken ships--and the names: _Justice_, _Friendship, Golden
Peace, Hope_--this is all that is left of _Hope_--of fickle
_Hope_--Railings, tholes, bails! And lo: the life buoy--which
saved itself and let distressed men perish.

THE POET. [_Searching in the pile_] Here is the name-board of
the ship _Justice_. That was the one which left Fairhaven with
the Blind Man's son on board. It is lost then! And with it are
gone the lover of Alice, the hopeless love of Edith.

THE DAUGHTER. The Blind Man? Fairhaven? I must have been
dreaming of them. And the lover of Alice, "Plain" Edith,
Foulstrand and the Quarantine, sulphur and carbolic acid, the
graduation in the church, the Lawyer's office, the passageway
and Victoria, the Growing Castle and the Officer--All this I
have been dreaming----

THE POET. It was in one of my poems.

THE DAUGHTER. You know then what poetry is----

THE POET. I know then what dreaming is--But what is poetry?

THE DAUGHTER. Not reality, but more than reality--not dreaming,
but daylight dreams----

THE POET. And the man-children think that we poets are only
playing--that we invent and make believe.

THE DAUGHTER. And fortunate it is, my friend, for otherwise the
world would lie fallow for lack of ministration. Everybody would
be stretched on his back, staring into the sky. Nobody would be
touching plough or spade, hammer or plane.

THE POET. And you say this, Indra's daughter, you who belong in
part up there----

THE DAUGHTER. You do right in reproaching me. Too long have I
stayed down here taking mud baths like you--My thoughts have
lost their power of flight; there is clay on their wings--mire
on their feet--and I myself--[_raising her arms_] I sink, I
sink--Help me, father, Lord of the Heavens! [_Silence_] I can
no longer hear his answer. The ether no longer carries the
sound from his lips to my ear's shell the silvery thread has
snapped--Woe is me, I am earthbound!

THE POET. Do you mean to ascend--soon?

THE DAUGHTER. As soon as I have consigned this mortal shape to
the flames--for even the waters of the ocean cannot cleanse me.
Why do you question me thus?

THE POET. Because I have a prayer----

THE DAUGHTER. What kind of prayer?

THE POET. A written supplication from humanity to the ruler of
the universe, formulated by a dreamer.

THE DAUGHTER. To be presented by whom?

THE POET. By Indra's daughter.

THE DAUGHTER. Can you repeat what you have written?

THE POET. I can.

THE DAUGHTER. Speak it then.

THE POET. Better that you do it.

THE DAUGHTER. Where can I read it?

THE POET. In my mind--or here.

      [_Hands her a roll of paper._

THE DAUGHTER. [_Receives the roll, but reads without looking at
it_] Well, by me it shall be spoken then:

"Why must you be born in anguish?
Why, O man-child, must you always
Wring your mother's heart with torture
When you bring her joy maternal,
Highest happiness yet known?
Why to life must you awaken,
Why to light give natal greeting,
With a cry of anger and of pain?
Why not meet it smiling, man-child,
When the gift of life is counted
In itself a boon unmatched?
Why like beasts should we be coming,
We of race divine and human?
Better garment craves the spirit
Than one made of filth and blood!
Need a god his teeth be changing----"

--Silence, rash one! Is it seemly
For the work to blame its maker?
No one yet has solved life's riddle.

"Thus begins the human journey
O'er a road of thorns and thistles;
If a beaten path be offered.
It is named at once forbidden;
If a flower you covet, straightway
You are told it is another's;
If a field should bar your progress,
And you dare to break across it,
You destroy your neighbour's harvest;
Others then your own will trample,
That the measure may be evened!
Every moment of enjoyment
Brings to some one else a sorrow,
But your sorrow gladdens no one,
For from sorrow naught but sorrow springs.

"Thus you journey till you die,
And your death brings others' bread."

--Is it thus that you approach,
Son of Dust, the One Most High?

THE POET.

Could the son of dust discover
Words so pure and bright and simple
That to heaven they might ascend----?

Child of gods, wilt thou interpret
Mankind's grievance in some language
That immortals understand?

THE DAUGHTER. I will.

THE POET. [_Pointing to the buoy_] What is that floating
there?--A buoy?

THE DAUGHTER. Yes.

THE POET. It looks like a lung with a windpipe.

THE DAUGHTER. It is the watchman of the seas. When danger is
abroad, it sings.

THE POET. It seems to me as if the sea were rising and the waves
growing larger----

THE DAUGHTER. Not unlikely.

THE POET. Woe! What do I see? A ship bearing down upon the reef.

THE DAUGHTER. What ship can that be?

THE POET. The ghost ship of the seas, I think.

THE DAUGHTER. What ship is that?

THE POET. The _Flying Dutchman_.

THE DAUGHTER. Oh, that one. Why is he punished so hard, and why
does he not seek harbour?

THE POET. Because he had seven faithless wives.

THE DAUGHTER. And for this he should be punished?

THE POET. Yes, all the right-minded condemned him----

THE DAUGHTER. Strange world, this!--How can he then be freed
from his curse?

THE POET. Freed?--Oh, they take good care that none is set free.

THE DAUGHTER. Why?

THE POET. Because--No, it is not the _Dutchman_! It is an
ordinary ship in distress. Why does not the buoy cry out now?
Look, how the sea is rising--how high the waves are--soon we
shall be unable to get out of the cave! Now the ship's bell is
ringing--Soon we shall have another figure-head. Cry out, buoy!
Do your duty, watchman! [_The buoy sounds a four-voice chord
of fifths and sixths, reminding one of fog horns_] The crew is
signalling to us--but we are doomed ourselves.

THE DAUGHTER. Do you not wish to be set free?

THE POET. Yes, of course--of course, I wish it--but not just
now, and not by water.

THE CREW. [_Sings in quartet_] Christ Kyrie!

[Illustration: music.]

THE POET. Now they are crying aloud, and so is the sea, but no
one gives ear.

THE CREW. [_As before_] Christ Kyrie!

THE DAUGHTER. Who is coming there?

THE POET. Walking on the waters? There is only one who does
that--and it is not Peter, the Rock, for he sank like a stone----

      _A white light is seen shining over the water at some
      distance_.

THE CREW. Christ Kyrie!

THE DAUGHTER. Can this be He?

THE POET. It is He, the crucified----

THE DAUGHTER. Why--tell me--why was He crucified?

THE POET. Because He wanted to set free----

THE DAUGHTER. Who was it--I have forgotten--that crucified Him?

THE POET. All the right-minded.

THE DAUGHTER. What a strange world!

THE POET. The sea is rising. Darkness is closing in upon us. The
storm is growing----

      [THE CREW _set up a wild outcry_.

THE POET. The crew scream with horror at the sight of their
Saviour--and now--they are leaping overboard for fear of the
Redeemer----

      [THE CREW _utter another cry_.

THE POET. Now they are crying because they must die. Crying when
they are born, and crying when they pass away!

      [_The rising waves threaten to engulf the two in the
      cave_.

THE DAUGHTER. If I could only be sure that it is a ship----

THE POET. Really--I don't think it is a ship--It is a
two-storied house with trees in front of it--and--a telephone
tower--a tower that reaches up into the skies--It is the
modern Tower of Babel sending wires to the upper regions--to
communicate with those above----

THE DAUGHTER. Child, the human thought needs no wires to make a
way for itself--the prayers of the pious penetrate the universe.
It cannot be a Tower of Babel, for if you want to assail the
heavens, you must do so with prayer.

THE POET. No, it is no house--no telephone tower--don't you see?

THE DAUGHTER. What are you seeing?

THE POET. I see an open space covered with snow--a drill
ground--The winter sun is shining from behind a church on a
hill, and the tower is casting its long shadow on the snow--Now
a troop of soldiers come marching across the grounds. They march
up along the tower, up the spire. Now they have reached the
cross, but I have a feeling that the first one who steps on the
gilded weathercock at the top must die. Now they are near it--a
corporal is leading them--ha-ha! There comes a cloud sweeping
across the open space, and right in front of the sun, of
course--now everything is gone--the water in the cloud put out
the sun's fire!--The light of the sun created the shadow picture
of the tower, but the shadow picture of the cloud swallowed the
shadow picture of the tower----

      _While_ THE POET _is still speaking, the stage is
      changed and shows once more the passageway outside
      the opera-house_.

THE DAUGHTER. [_To_ THE PORTRESS] Has the Lord Chancellor
arrived yet?

THE PORTRESS. No.

THE DAUGHTER. And the Deans of the Faculties?

THE PORTRESS. No.

THE DAUGHTER. Call them at once, then, for the door is to be
opened----

THE PORTRESS. Is it so very pressing?

THE DAUGHTER. Yes, it is. For there is a suspicion that the
solution of the world-riddle may be hidden behind it. Call the
Lord Chancellor, and the Deans of the Four Faculties also.

      [THE PORTRESS _blows in a whistle_.

THE DAUGHTER. And do not forget the Glazier and his diamond, for
without them nothing can be done.

      STAGE PEOPLE _enter from the left as in the earlier
      scene_.

THE OFFICER. [_Enters from the background, in Prince Albert and
high hat, with a bunch of roses in his hand, looking radiantly
happy_] Victoria!

THE PORTRESS. The young lady will be coming in a moment.

THE OFFICER. Good! The carriage is waiting, the table is set,
the wine is on ice--Permit me to embrace you, madam! [_Embraces_
THE PORTRESS] Victoria!

A WOMAN'S VOICE FROM ABOVE. [_Sings_] I am here!

THE OFFICER. [_Begins to walk to and fro_] Good! I am waiting.

THE POET. It seems to me that all this has happened before----

THE DAUGHTER. So it seems to me also.

THE POET. Perhaps I have dreamt it.

THE DAUGHTER. Or put it in a poem, perhaps.

THE POET. Or put it in a poem.

THE DAUGHTER. Then you know what poetry is.

THE POET. Then I know what dreaming is.

THE DAUGHTER. It seems to me that we have said all this to each
other before, in some other place.

THE POET. Then you may soon figure out what reality is.

THE DAUGHTER. Or dreaming!

THE POET. Or poetry!

      _Enter the_ LORD CHANCELLOR _and the_ DEANS _of the_
      THEOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, MEDICAL, _and_ LEGAL
      FACULTIES.

LORD CHANCELLOR. It is about the opening of that door, of
course--What does the Dean of the Theological Faculty think of
it?

DEAN OF THEOLOGY. I do not think--I believe--_Credo_----

DEAN OF PHILOSOPHY. I hold----

DEAN OF MEDICINE. I know----

DEAN OF JURISPRUDENCE. I doubt until I have evidence and
witnesses.

LORD CHANCELLOR. Now they are fighting again!--Well, what does
Theology believe?

THEOLOGY. I believe that this door must not be opened, because
it hides dangerous truths----

PHILOSOPHY. Truth is never dangerous.

MEDICINE. What is truth?

JURISPRUDENCE. What can be proved by two witnesses.

THEOLOGY. Anything can be proved by two false witnesses--thinks
the pettifogger.

PHILOSOPHY. Truth is wisdom, and wisdom, knowledge, is
philosophy itself--Philosophy is the science of sciences, the
knowledge of knowing, and all other sciences are its servants.

MEDICINE. Natural science is the only true science--and
philosophy is no science at all. It is nothing but empty
speculation.

THEOLOGY. Good!

PHILOSOPHY. [_To_ THEOLOGY] Good, you say! And what are you,
then? You are the arch-enemy of all knowledge; you are the very
antithesis of knowledge; you are ignorance and obscuration----

MEDICINE. Good!

THEOLOGY. [_To_ MEDICINE] You cry "good," you, who cannot see
beyond the length of your own nose in the magnifying glass; who
believes in nothing but your own unreliable senses--in your
vision, for instance, which may be far-sighted, near-sighted,
blind, purblind, cross-eyed, one-eyed, colour-blind, red-blind,
green-blind----

MEDICINE. Idiot!

THEOLOGY. Ass! [_They fight_.

LORD CHANCELLOR. Peace! One crow does not peck out the other's
eye.

PHILOSOPHY. If I had to choose between those two, Theology and
Medicine, I should choose--neither!

JURISPRUDENCE. And if I had to sit in judgment on the three of
you, I should find--all guilty! You cannot agree on a single
point, and you never could. Let us get back to the case in
court. What is the opinion of the Lord Chancellor as to this
door and its opening?

LORD CHANCELLOR. Opinion? I have no opinion whatever. I am
merely appointed by the government to see that you don't break
each other's arms and legs in the Council--while you are
educating the young! Opinion? Why, I take mighty good care to
avoid everything of the kind. Once I had one or two, but they
were refuted at once. Opinions are always refuted--by their
opponents, of course--But perhaps we might open the door now,
even with the risk of finding some dangerous truths behind it?

JURISPRUDENCE. What is truth? What is truth?

THEOLOGY. I am the truth and the life----

PHILOSOPHY. I am the science of sciences----

MEDICINE. I am the only exact science----

JURISPRUDENCE. I doubt---- [_They fight_.

THE DAUGHTER. Instructors of the young, take shame!

JURISPRUDENCE. Lord Chancellor, as representative of the
government, as head of the corps of instructors, you must
prosecute this woman's offence. She has told all of you to
take shame, which is an insult; and she has--in a sneering,
ironical sense--called you instructors of the young, which is a
slanderous speech.

THE DAUGHTER. Poor youth!

JURISPRUDENCE. She pities the young, which is to accuse us. Lord
Chancellor, you must prosecute the offence.

THE DAUGHTER. Yes, I accuse you--you in a body--of sowing doubt
and discord in the minds of the young.

JURISPRUDENCE. Listen to her--she herself is making the young
question our authority, and then she charges us with sowing
doubt. Is it not a criminal act, I ask all the right-minded?

ALL RIGHT-MINDED. Yes, it is criminal.

JURISPRUDENCE. All the right-minded have condemned you. Leave in
peace with your lucre, or else----

THE DAUGHTER. My lucre? Or else? What else?

JURISPRUDENCE. Else you will be stoned.

THE POET. Or crucified.

THE DAUGHTER. I leave. Follow me, and you shall learn the riddle.

THE POET. Which riddle?

THE DAUGHTER. What did he mean with "my lucre"?

THE POET. Probably nothing at all. That kind of thing we call
talk. He was just talking.

THE DAUGHTER. But it was what hurt me more than anything else!

THE POET. That is why he said it, I suppose--Men are that way.

ALL RIGHT-MINDED. Hooray! The door is open.

LORD CHANCELLOR. What was behind the door?

THE GLAZIER. I can see nothing.

LORD CHANCELLOR. He cannot see anything--of course, he cannot!
Deans of the Faculties: what was behind that door?

THEOLOGY. Nothing! That is the solution of the world-riddle. In
the beginning God created heaven and the earth out of nothing----

PHILOSOPHY. Out of nothing comes nothing.

MEDICINE. Yes, bosh--which is nothing!

JURISPRUDENCE. I doubt. And this is a case of deception. I
appeal to all the right-minded.

THE DAUGHTER. [_To_ THE POET] Who are the right-minded?

THE POET. Who can tell? Frequently all the right-minded consist
of a single person. To-day it is me and mine; to-morrow it is
you and yours. To that position you are appointed--or rather,
you appoint yourself to it.

ALL RIGHT-MINDED. We have been deceived.

LORD CHANCELLOR. Who has deceived you?

ALL RIGHT-MINDED. The Daughter!

LORD CHANCELLOR. Will the Daughter please tell us what she meant
by having this door opened?

THE DAUGHTER. No, friends. If I did, you would not believe me.

MEDICINE. Why, then, there is nothing there.

THE DAUGHTER. You have said it--but you have not understood.

MEDICINE. It is bosh, what she says!

ALL. Bosh!

THE DAUGHTER. [_To_ THE POET] They are to be pitied.

THE POET. Are you in earnest?

THE DAUGHTER. Always in earnest.

THE POET. Do you think the right-minded are to be pitied also?

THE DAUGHTER. They most of all, perhaps.

THE POET. And the four faculties, too?

THE DAUGHTER. They also, and not the least. Four heads, four
minds, and one body. Who made that monster?

ALL. She has not answered!

LORD CHANCELLOR. Stone her then!

THE DAUGHTER. I have answered.

LORD CHANCELLOR. Hear--she answers.

ALL. Stone her! She answers!

THE DAUGHTER. Whether she answer or do not answer, stone her!
Come, prophet, and I shall tell you the riddle--but far away
from here--out in the desert, where no one can hear us, no one
see us, for----

THE LAWYER. [_Enters and takes_ THE DAUGHTER _by the arm_] Have
you forgotten your duties?

THE DAUGHTER. Oh, heavens, no! But I have higher duties.

THE LAWYER. And your child?

THE DAUGHTER. My child--what of it?

THE LAWYER. Your child is crying for you.

THE DAUGHTER. My child! Woe, I am earth-bound! And this pain in
my breast, this anguish--what is it?

THE LAWYER. Don't you know?

THE DAUGHTER. No.

THE LAWYER. It is remorse.

THE DAUGHTER. Is that remorse?

THE LAWYER. Yes, and it follows every neglected duty; every
pleasure, even the most innocent, if innocent pleasures exist,
which seems doubtful; and every suffering inflicted upon one's
fellow-beings.

THE DAUGHTER. And there is no remedy?

THE LAWYER. Yes, but only one. It consists in doing your duty at
once----

THE DAUGHTER. You look like a demon when you speak that word
duty--And when, as in my case, there are two duties to be met?

THE LAWYER. Meet one first, and then the other.

THE DAUGHTER. The highest first--therefore, you look after my
child, and I shall do my duty----

THE LAWYER. Your child suffers because it misses you--can you
bear to know that a human being is suffering for your sake?

THE DAUGHTER. Now strife has entered my soul--it is rent in two,
and the halves are being pulled in opposite directions!

THE LAWYER. Such, you know, are life's little discords.

THE DAUGHTER. Oh, how it is pulling!

THE POET. If you could only know how I have spread sorrow and
ruin around me by the exercise of my calling--and note that
I say _calling_, which carries with it the highest duty of
all--then you would not even touch my hand.

THE DAUGHTER. What do you mean?

THE POET. I had a father who put his whole hope on me as his
only son, destined to continue his enterprise. I ran away from
the business college. My father grieved himself to death. My
mother wanted me to be religious, and I could not do what she
wanted--and she disowned me. I had a friend who assisted me
through trying days of need--and that friend acted as a tyrant
against those on whose behalf I was speaking and writing. And
I had to strike down my friend and benefactor in order to save
my soul. Since then I have had no peace. Men call me devoid of
honour, infamous--and it does not help that my conscience says,
"you have done right," for in the next moment it is saying, "you
have done wrong." Such is life.

THE DAUGHTER. Come with me into the desert.

THE LAWYER. Your child!

THE DAUGHTER. [_Indicating all those present_] Here are my
children. By themselves they are good, but if they only come
together, then they quarrel and turn into demons--Farewell!


      _Outside the castle. The same scenery as in the first
      scene of the first act. But now the ground in front
      of the castle wall is covered with flowers--blue
      monk's-hood or aconite. On the roof of the castle, at
      the very top of its lantern, there is a chrysanthemum
      bud ready to open. The castle windows are illuminated
      with candles_.

      THE DAUGHTER _and_ THE POET.

THE DAUGHTER. The hour is not distant when, with the help of the
flames, I shall once more ascend to the ether. It is what you
call to die, and what you approach in fear.

THE POET. Fear of the unknown.

THE DAUGHTER. Which is known to you.

THE POET. Who knows it?

THE DAUGHTER. All! Why do you not believe your prophets?

THE POET. Prophets have always been disbelieved. Why is that
so? And "if God has spoken, why will men not believe then?" His
convincing power ought to be irresistible.

THE DAUGHTER. Have you always doubted?

THE POET. No. I have had certainty many times. But after a while
it passed away, like a dream when you wake up.

THE DAUGHTER. It is not easy to be human!

THE POET. You see and admit it?

THE DAUGHTER. I do.

THE POET. Listen! Was it not Indra that once sent his son down
here to receive the complaints of mankind?

THE DAUGHTER. Thus it happened--and how was he received?

THE POET. How did he fill his mission?--to answer with another
question.

THE DAUGHTER. And if I may reply with still another--was not
man's position bettered by his visit to the earth? Answer truly!

THE POET. Bettered?--Yes, a little. A very little--But instead
of asking questions--will you not tell the riddle?

THE DAUGHTER. Yes. But to what use? You will not believe me.

THE POET. In you I shall believe, for I know who you are.

THE DAUGHTER. Then I shall tell! In the morning of the ages,
before the sun was shining, Brahma, the divine primal force, let
himself be persuaded by Maya, the world-mother, to propagate
himself. This meeting of the divine primal matter with the
earth-matter was the fall of heaven into sin. Thus the world,
existence, mankind, are nothing but a phantom, an appearance, a
dream-image----

THE POET. My dream!

THE DAUGHTER. A dream of truth! But in order to free themselves
from the earth-matter, the offspring of Brahma seek privation
and suffering. There you have suffering as a liberator. But this
craving for suffering comes into conflict with the craving for
enjoyment, or love--do you now understand what love is, with its
utmost joys merged into its utmost sufferings, with its mixture
of what is most sweet and most bitter? Can you now grasp what
woman is? Woman, through whom sin and death found their way into
life?

THE POET. I understand!--And the end?

THE DAUGHTER. You know it: conflict between the pain of
enjoyment and the pleasure of suffering--between the pangs of
the penitent and the joys of the prodigal----

THE POET. A conflict it is then?

THE DAUGHTER. Conflict between opposites produces energy, as
fire and water give the power of steam----

THE POET. But peace? Rest?

THE DAUGHTER. Hush! You must ask no more, and I can no longer
answer. The altar is already adorned for the sacrifice--the
flowers are standing guard--the candles are lit--there are white
sheets in the windows--spruce boughs have been spread in the
gateway----

THE POET. And you say this as calmly as if for you suffering did
not exist!

THE DAUGHTER. You think so?--I have suffered all your
sufferings, but in a hundredfold degree, for my sensations were
so much more acute----

THE POET. Relate your sorrow!

THE DAUGHTER. Poet, could you tell yours so that not one word
went too far? Could your word at any time approach your thought?

THE POET. No, you are right! To myself I appeared like one
struck dumb, and when the mass listened admiringly to my song,
I found it mere noise--for this reason, you see, I have always
felt ashamed when they praised me.

THE DAUGHTER. And then you ask me--Look me straight in the eye!

THE POET. I cannot bear your glance----

THE DAUGHTER. How could you bear my word then, were I to speak
in your tongue?

THE POET. But tell me at least before you go: from what did you
suffer most of all down here?

THE DAUGHTER. From--_being_: to feel my vision weakened by an
eye, my hearing blunted by an ear, and my thought, my bright and
buoyant thought, bound in labyrinthine coils of fat. You have
seen a brain--what roundabout and sneaking paths----

THE POET. Well, that is because all the right-minded think
crookedly!

THE DAUGHTER. Malicious, always malicious, all of you!

THE POET. How could one possibly be otherwise?

THE DAUGHTER. First of all I now shake the dust from my
feet--the dirt and the clay--

      [_Takes off her shoes and puts them into the fire_.

THE PORTRESS. [_Puts her shawl into the fire_] Perhaps I may
burn my shawl at the same time? [_Goes out_.

THE OFFICER. [_Enters_] And I my roses, of which only the thorns
are left. [_Goes out_.

THE BILLPOSTER. [_Enters_] My bills may go, but never the
dipnet! [_Goes out_.

THE GLAZIER. [_Enters_] The diamond that opened the
door--good-bye! [_Goes out_.

THE LAWYER. [_Enters_] The minutes of the great process
concerning the pope's beard or the water loss in the sources of
the Ganges. [_Goes out_.

MASTER OF QUARANTINE. [_Enters_] A small contribution in shape
of the black mask that made me a blackamoor against my will!
[_Goes out_.

VICTORIA. [_Enters_] My beauty, my sorrow! [_Goes out_.

EDITH. [_Enters_] My plainness, my sorrow! [_Goes out_.

THE BLIND MAN. [_Enters; puts his hand into the fire_] I give my
hand for my eye. [_Goes out_.

      DON JUAN _in his wheel chair_; SHE _and_ THE FRIEND.

DON JUAN. Hurry up! Hurry up! Life is short!

      [_Leaves with the other two_.

THE POET. I have read that when the end of life draws near,
everything and everybody rushes by in continuous review--Is
this the end?

THE DAUGHTER. Yes, it is my end. Farewell!

THE POET. Give us a parting word.

THE DAUGHTER. No, I cannot. Do you believe that your words can
express our thoughts?

DEAN OF THEOLOGY. [_Enters in a rage_] I am cast off by God and
persecuted by man; I am deserted by the government and scorned
by my colleagues! How am I to believe when nobody else believes?
How am I to defend a god that does not defend his own? Bosh,
that's what it is!

      [_Throws a book on the fire and goes out_.

THE POET. [_Snatches the book out of the fire_] Do you know what
it is? A martyrology, a calendar with a martyr for each day of
the year.

THE DAUGHTER. Martyr?

THE POET. Yes, one that has been tortured and killed on
account of his faith! Tell me why?--Do you think that all who
are tortured suffer, and that all who are killed feel pain?
Suffering is said to be salvation, and death a liberation.

CHRISTINE. [_With slips of paper_] I paste, I paste until there
is nothing more to paste----

THE POET. And if heaven should split in twain, you would try to
paste it together--Away!

CHRISTINE. Are there no double windows in this castle?

THE POET. Not one, I tell you.

CHRISTINE. Well, then I'll go. [_Goes out_.

THE DAUGHTER.

The parting hour has come, the end draws near.
And now farewell, thou dreaming child of man,
Thou singer, who alone knows how to live!
When from thy winged flight above the earth
At times thou sweepest downward to the dust,
It is to touch it only, not to stay!

And as I go--how, in the parting hour,
As one must leave for e'er a friend, a place,
The heart with longing swells for what one loves,
And with regret for all wherein one failed!
O, now the pangs of life in all their force
I feel: I know at last the lot of man
Regretfully one views what once was scorned;
For sins one never sinned remorse is felt;
To stay one craves, but equally to leave:
As if to horses tied that pull apart,
One's heart is split in twain, one's feelings rent,
By indecision, contrast, and discord.

Farewell! To all thy fellow-men make known
That where I go I shall forget them not;
And in thy name their grievance shall be placed
Before the throne. Farewell!

      _She goes into the castle. Music is heard. The
      background is lit up by the burning castle and
      reveals a wall of human faces, questioning, grieving,
      despairing. As the castle breaks into flames, the
      bud on the roof opens into a gigantic chrysanthemum
      flower_.

_Curtain_.




THE LINK

A TRAGEDY IN ONE ACT

1877




CHARACTERS

THE JUDGE, 27 _years_
THE PASTOR, 60 _years_
THE BARON, 42 _years_
THE BARONESS, 40 _years_
ALEXANDER EKLUND              }
EMMANUEL WICKBERG             }
CARL JOHAN SJÖBERG            }
ERIC OTTO BOMAN               }
ÄRENFRID SÖDERBERG            }
OLOF ANDERSSON OF WIK         } _Jurors_
CARL PETER ANDERSSON OF BERGA }
ALEX WALLIN                   }
ANDERS ERIC RUTH              }
SWEN OSCAR ERLIN              }
AUGUST ALEXANDER VASS         }
LUDWIG ÖSTMAN                 }
THE CLERK OF THE COURT
THE SHERIFF
THE CONSTABLE
THE LAWYER
ALEXANDERSSON, _a farmer_
ALMA JONSSON, _a servant girl_
THE MILKMAID
THE FARM HAND
SPECTATORS




THE LINK


_A court-room. Door and windows in the background. Through the
windows are seen the churchyard and the bell-tower. Door on the
right. On the left, the desk of the judge on a platform. The
front side of the desk is decorated in gold, with the judicial
emblems of the sword and the scales. On both sides of the desk
are placed chairs and small tables for the twelve jurors. In the
centre of the room, benches for the spectators. Along the sides
of the room are cupboards built into the walls. On the doors of
these are posted court notices and schedules of market tolls_.


SCENE I


THE SHERIFF _and_ THE CONSTABLE


THE SHERIFF. Did you ever see such a lot of people at the summer
sessions before?

THE CONSTABLE. Not in fifteen years, or since we had the big
murder at Alder Lake.

SHERIFF. Well, this story here is almost as good as a double
parricide. That the Baron and the Baroness are going to separate
is scandal enough, but when on top of it the families take to
wrangling about properties and estates, then it's easy to see
that there's going to be a hot time. The only thing wanting now
is that they get to fighting over the child, too, and then King
Solomon himself can't tell what's right.

CONSTABLE. What is there behind this case anyhow? Some say this
and some say that, but the blame ought to rest on somebody?

SHERIFF. I don't know about that. Sometimes it is nobody's
fault when two quarrel, and then again one alone is to blame
for the quarrel of two. Now take my old shrew, for instance,
she's running around at home scolding for dear life all by
herself when I am away, they tell me. Besides, this is not just
a quarrel, but a full-fledged criminal case, and in most such
one party is complainant, or the one that has been wronged, and
the other is defendant, or the one that has committed the crime.
But in this case it is not easy to tell who is guilty, for both
parties are at once complainants and defendants.

CONSTABLE. Well, well, queer things do happen these days. It's
as if the women had gone crazy. My old one has spells when she
says that I should bear children also, if there was any justice
in things--just as if the Lord didn't know how he made his own
creatures. And then I get long rigmaroles about her being human
also, just as if I didn't know that before, or had said anything
to the contrary; and of her being tired of acting as my servant
girl, when, for a fact, I am not much better than her hired man.

SHERIFF. So-o. So you have got that kind of plague in your house
too. Mine reads a paper she gets at the manor, and then she
tells me as something wonderful, one day, that some farmer's
lass has turned mason, and the next that an old woman has set
upon and beaten her sick husband. I cannot quite get at what's
the meaning of it all, but it looks most as if she was mad at me
for being a man.

CONSTABLE. Mighty queer, that's what it is. [_Offers snuff_]
Fine weather we're having. The rye is standing as thick as the
hairs in a fox fell, and we got over the black frosts without a
hitch.

SHERIFF. There is nothing of mine growing, and good years are
bad for me: no executions and no auctions. Do you know anything
about the new judge who is going to hold court to-day?

CONSTABLE. Not much, but I understand he's a youngster who has
just got his appointment and is going to sit for the first time
now----

SHERIFF. And they say he is religious. Hm!

CONSTABLE. Hm-hm!--They're taking an awful time over the church
services this year.

SHERIFF. [_Puts a big Bible on the judge's desk and a smaller
one on each one of the jurors' tables_] It cannot be long till
they're done now, for they have been at it most of an hour.

CONSTABLE. He's a wonder at preaching, is the Pastor, once he
gets going. [_Pause_] Are the parties to put in a personal
appearance?

SHERIFF. Both of them, so I guess we'll have some scrapping--
[_The bell in the tower begins to ring_] There, now they're
done--Just give the tables a wiping, and I think we are ready to
start.

CONSTABLE. And there's ink in all the wells?



SCENE II


_The_ BARON _and the_ BARONESS _enter_.


BARON. [_In a low voice to the_ BARONESS] Then, before we part
for a year, we are perfectly agreed on all points. First, no
recriminations in court?

BARONESS. Do you think I would care to lay open the intimate
details of our common life before a lot of curious peasants?

BARON. So much the better! And further: you keep the child
during the year of separation, provided it may visit me when I
so desire, and provided it is educated in accordance with the
principles laid down by me and approved by you?

BARONESS. Exactly!

BARON. And out of the income from the estate I give you three
thousand crowns during the year of separation?

BARONESS. Agreed.

BARON. Then I have nothing more to add, but ask only to bid you
good-bye. Why we part is known only to you and me, and for the
sake of our son no one else must know it. But for his sake I beg
you also: start no fight, lest we be goaded into soiling the
names of his parents. It is more than likely, anyhow, that life
in its cruelty will make him suffer for our divorce.

BARONESS. I don't care to fight as long as I may keep my child.

BARON. Let us then concentrate our attention on the child's
welfare and forget what has happened between us. And remember
another thing: if we fight about the child and question each
other's fitness to take care of it, the judge may take it away
from both of us and put it with some of those religious people
who will bring it up in hatred and contempt for its parents.

BARONESS. That's impossible!

BARON. Such, my dear, is the law.

BARONESS. It is a stupid law.

BARON. Maybe, but it holds; and for you no less than for others.

BARONESS. It is unnatural! And I should never submit to it.

BARON. You don't have to, as we have decided to raise no
objections against each other. We have never agreed before, but
on this one point we are at one, are we not: to part without
any kind of hostility? [_To the_ SHERIFF] Could the Baroness be
permitted to wait in that room over there?

SHERIFF. Certainly, walk right in.

      _The_ BARON _escorts the_ BARONESS _to the door on
      the right and leaves then himself through the door in
      the background_.



SCENE III


      _The_ SHERIFF. _The_ CONSTABLE. _The_ LAWYER. ALMA
      JONSSON. _The_ MILKMAID. _The_ FARM HAND.


LAWYER. [_To_ ALMA JONSSON] Look here, my girl: that you have
stolen, I don't doubt for a moment; but as your master has no
witnesses to it, you are not guilty. But as your master has
called you a thief in the presence of two witnesses, he is
guilty of slander. And now you are complainant and he defendant.
Remember this one thing: the first duty of a criminal is--to
deny!

ALMA JONSSON. But please, sir, didn't you just say I was no
criminal, and master was?

LAWYER. You are a criminal because you have committed a theft,
but as you have called for a lawyer, it is my unmistakable duty
to clear you and convict your master. Therefore, and for the
last time: deny! [_To the witnesses_] And as to the witnesses,
what are they going to testify? Listen: a good witness sticks
to the case. Now you must bear in mind that the question is
not whether Alma has stolen anything or not, but only whether
Alexandersson said that she had stolen. For, mark you, he has
no right to prove his assertions, but we have. Why it should
be so, the devil only knows! But that's none of your business.
Therefore: keep your tongues straight and your fingers on the
Bible!

MILKMAID. Lord, but I'm that scared, for I don't know what I'm
going to say!

FARM HAND. You say as I do, and then you won't be lying.



SCENE IV


      _The_ JUDGE _and the_ PASTOR _enter_.


JUDGE. Permit me to thank you for the sermon, Pastor.

PASTOR. Oh, don't mention it, Judge.

JUDGE. Yes--for, as you know, this is my first court. To tell
the truth, I have felt some fear of this career, into which I
have been thrown almost against my will. For one thing, the laws
are so imperfect, the judicial practices so uncertain, and human
nature so full of falsehood and dissimulation, that I have often
wondered how a judge could dare to express any definite opinion
at all. And to-day you have revived all my old fears.

PASTOR. To be conscientious is a duty, of course, but to be
sentimental about it won't do. And as everything else on this
earth is imperfect, there is no reason why we should expect
judges and judgments to be perfect.

JUDGE. That may be, but it does not prevent me from harbouring
a sense of tremendous responsibility, as I have men's fates in
my hand, and a word spoken by me may show its effects through
generations. I am especially thinking of this separation suit
started by the Baron and his wife, and I have to ask you--you
who have administered the two prescribed warnings before
the Vestry Board--what is your view concerning their mutual
relations and relative guilt?

PASTOR. In other words, Judge, you would either put me in your
own place or base your decision on my testimony. And all I can
do is to refer you to the minutes of the board.

JUDGE. Yes, the minutes--I know them. But it is just what does
not appear in the minutes that I need to know.

PASTOR. What charges the couple made against each other at the
private hearings must be my secret. And besides, how can I know
who told the truth and who lied? I have to tell you what I told
them: there is no reason why I should believe more in one than
in the other.

JUDGE. But were you not able to form some kind of opinion in the
matter during the hearings?

PASTOR. When I heard one, I formed one opinion, and another when
I was hearing the other. In a word: I have no settled view in
this question.

JUDGE. But I am to express a definite view--I, who know nothing
at all.

PASTOR. That is the heavy task of the judge, which I could never
undertake.

JUDGE. But there are witnesses to be heard? Evidence to be
obtained?

PASTOR. No, they are not accusing each other in public. And
furthermore: two false witnesses will furnish sufficient proof,
and a perjurer will do just as well. Do you think I would base
my judgment on servant gossip, on the loose-tongued chatter of
envious neighbours, or on the spiteful partisanship of relatives?

JUDGE. You are a terrible sceptic, Pastor.

PASTOR. Well, one gets to be so after sixty, and particularly
after having tended souls for forty years. The habit of lying
clings like original sin, and I believe that all men lie. As
children we lie out of fear; as grown-ups, out of interest,
need, instinct for self-preservation; and I have known those who
lied out of sheer kindliness. In the present case, and in so
far as this married couple is concerned, I fear you will find
it very hard to figure out who has told most of the truth, and
all I can do is to warn you against being caught in the snares
set by preconceived opinions. You were married not long ago
yourself, and you are still under the spell of the young woman's
witchery. For this reason you may easily become prejudiced in
favor of a young and charming lady, who is an unhappy wife and
a mother besides. On the other hand, you have also recently
become a father, and as such you cannot escape being moved by
the impending separation of the father from his child. Beware of
sympathy with either side, for sympathy with one is cruelty to
the other.

JUDGE. One thing will make my task more easy at least, and that
is their mutual agreement on the principal points.

PASTOR. Don't rely too much on that, for it is what they all
say. And when they appear in court, the smouldering fire breaks
into open flames. In this case a tiny spark will be enough to
start a conflagration. Here comes the jury. Well, good-by for a
while! I stay, although I shall not be seen.



SCENE V


      _The_ TWELVE JURORS _enter. The_ SHERIFF _rings a
      bell from the open doorway in the background. The
      members of the Court take their seats_. SPECTATORS
      _pour into the room_.


JUDGE. With a reminder of the provisions in Chapter Eleven,
Sections Five, Six, and Eight, of the Criminal Code, as to the
peace and order that must be maintained in Court, I hereby
declare the proceedings of the Court opened. [_Whispers to the_
CLERK OF THE COURT; _then_] Will the newly chosen jury please
take the oath.

JURORS. [_Rise, each one putting the fingers of one hand on the
Bible in front of him; then they speak in unison except when
their names are being read out_]

I, Alexander Eklund;
I, Emmanuel Wickberg;
I, Carl Johan Sjöberg;
I, Eric Otto Boman;
I, Ärenfrid Söderberg;
I, Olof Andersson of Wik;
I, Carl Peter Andersson of Berga;
I, Axel Wallin;
I, Anders Eric Ruth;
I, Swen Oscar Erlin;
I, August Alexander Vass;
I, Ludwig Östman;

[_all at once, keeping time and speaking with low voices in a
low pitch_] promise and swear by God and His Holy Gospel, that
I will and shall, according to my best reason and conscience,
judge rightly in all cases, no less for the poor than for the
rich, and decide in accordance with the law of God and that of
this country, as well as its legal statutes: [_in a higher pitch
and with raised voices_] never tamper with the law or further
any wrong, for the sake of either kinship by blood, kinship by
marriage, friendship, envy, ill-will, or fear; nor for the sake
of bribe or gift or any other cause, under any form whatsoever:
and not make him responsible who has no guilt, or set him free
who is guilty. [_Raising their voices still further_] Neither
before judgment nor afterward, neither to parties in court nor
to others, am I to discover such counsel as may be taken by the
Court behind closed doors. All this I will and shall faithfully
keep as an honest and upright judge, without fell deceit or
design--[_Pause_] So help God my life and soul!

[_The_ JURORS _sit down._

JUDGE. [_To the_ SHERIFF] Call the case of Alma Jonsson against
the farmer Alexandersson.



SCENE VI


      _Enter the_ LAWYER, ALEXANDERSSON, ALMA JONSSON,
      _the_ MILKMAID, _the_ FARM HAND.


SHERIFF, [_Calls out_] The servant girl Alma Jonsson and the
farmer Alexandersson.

LAWYER. I wish to present my power of attorney for the
complainant.

JUDGE. [_Examines the submitted document; then_] The servant
girl Alma Jonsson has had writ served on her former master,
Alexandersson, bringing charges under Chapter Sixteen, Section
Eight, of the Criminal Code, providing for imprisonment of not
more than six months, or a fine, because Alexandersson has
called her a thief without supporting his accusation or making
legal charges. What have you to say, Alexandersson?

ALEXANDERSSON. I called her a thief because I caught her
stealing.

JUDGE. Have you witnesses to her theft?

ALEXANDERSSON. No, as luck would have it, there's no witnesses,
for I mostly go about by myself.

JUDGE. Why did you not make a charge against her?

ALEXANDERSSON. Well, I never go to court. And then it isn't the
usage among us masters to prosecute household thefts, partly
because there are so many of 'em, and partly because we don't
like to spoil a servant's whole future.

JUDGE. Alma Jonsson, what have you to say in answer to this?

ALMA JONSSON. Ya-es----

LAWYER. You keep quiet! Alma Jonsson, who is not a defendant
in this case, but the complainant, asks to have her witnesses
heard in order that she may prove the slander uttered against
her by Alexandersson.

JUDGE. As Alexandersson has admitted the slander, I shall ask
for no witnesses. On the other hand, it is of importance for me
to know whether Alma Jonsson be guilty of the offence mentioned,
for if Alexandersson had reasonable grounds for his utterance,
this will be held a mitigating circumstance when sentence is
passed.

LAWYER. I must take exception to the statement made by the
Court, for by Chapter Sixteen, Section Thirteen, of the Criminal
Code, one charged with slander is denied the right to bring
evidence as to the truth of his defamation.

JUDGE. Parties, witnesses, and spectators will retire so that
the Court may consider the case.

      [_All go out except the members of the Court_.



SCENE VII


      The COURT.


JUDGE. Is Alexandersson an honest and reliable man?

ALL THE JURORS. Alexandersson is a reliable man.

JUDGE. Is Alma Jonsson known as an honest servant?

ERIC OTTO BOMAN. I had to discharge Alma Jonsson last year for
petty thievery.

JUDGE. And nevertheless I have now to fine Alexandersson. There
is no way out of it. Is he poor?

LUDWIG ÖSTMAN. He's behind with his Crown taxes, and his crop
failed last year. So I guess the fine will be more than he can
carry.

JUDGE. And yet I can find no reason to postpone the case, as
it is a clear one, and Alexandersson has no right to prove
anything on his side. Has any one here anything to add or object?

ALEXANDER EKLUND. I would just ask leave to make a general
reflection. A case like this, where one not only innocent, but
offended against, has to take the punishment, while the thief
has his so-called honour restored, may easily bring about that
people grow less forbearing toward their fellow-men, and that
taking cases to court grows more common.

JUDGE. This is quite possible, but general reflections have no
place in the proceedings, and the Court has to make a decision.
Consequently my one question to the jury is: can Alexandersson
be held guilty under Chapter Sixteen, Section Thirteen, of the
Criminal Code?

ALL THE JURORS. Yes.

JUDGE. [_To the_ SHERIFF] Call in the parties and the witnesses.



SCENE VIII


      ALL _return_.


JUDGE. In the case of Alma Jonsson against the farmer
Alexandersson, Alexandersson is sentenced to pay a fine of one
hundred crowns for slander.

ALEXANDERSSON. But I saw her stealing with my own eyes!--That's
what one gets for being kind!

LAWYER. [_To_ ALMA JONSSON] What did I tell you! If you only
deny, everything is all right. Alexandersson acted like a fool
and denied nothing. If I had been his counsel, and he had
denied the charge, I should have challenged your witnesses, and
there you would have been!--Now we'll go out and settle up this
business.

[_Goes out with_ ALMA JONSSON _and the witnesses_.

ALEXANDERSSON. [_To the_ Sheriff] And perhaps I have now got to
give Alma her papers and write down that she has been honest and
faithful?

SHERIFF. That's none of my concern!

ALEXANDERSSON. [_To the_ Constable] And for a thing like this I
am to lose house and land! Who'd believe it, that justice means
honour for the thief and a flogging for him that's robbed! Damn
it!--Come and have a cup of coffee with a stick in it afterward,
Öman.

CONSTABLE. I'll come, but don't make a row.

ALEXANDERSSON. Yes, I'll be damned if I don't, even if it should
cost me three months!

CONSTABLE. Now please don't make a row--don't make a row!



SCENE IX


      _The_ BARON _and the_ BARONESS _enter after awhile_.


JUDGE. [_To the_ SHERIFF] Call the separation suit of Baron
Sprengel and his wife, born Malmberg.

SHERIFF. Separation suit of Baron Sprengel and his wife, born
Malmberg.

_The_ BARON _and the_ BARONESS _enter_.

JUDGE. In the proceedings entered against his wife, Baron
Sprengel declares his intention of not continuing the marriage,
and requests that, as the warnings of the Vestry Board have
proved fruitless, order be issued for a year's separation in bed
and board. What objection have you to make to this, Baroness?

BARONESS. To the separation I make no objection at all; if I can
only have my child. That is my condition.

JUDGE. The law recognises no conditions in a case like this, and
it is for the Court to dispose of the child.

BARONESS. Why, that's very peculiar!

JUDGE. For this reason it is of utmost importance that the
Court learn who has caused the dissension leading to this suit.
According to appended minutes of the Vestry Board, it appears
that the wife has admitted having at times shown a quarrelsome
and difficult disposition, while the husband has admitted no
fault. Thus, Baroness, you appear to have admitted----

BARONESS. That's a lie!

JUDGE. I find it difficult to believe that the minutes of the
Vestry Board, countersigned by the Pastor and eight other
trustworthy men, can be inaccurate.

BARONESS. The report is false!

JUDGE. Such remarks cannot be made with impunity before this
Court.

BARON. May I call attention to the fact that I have voluntarily
surrendered the child to the Baroness on certain conditions?

JUDGE. And I have to repeat once more what I said before,
namely, that the case will be decided by the Court and not
by the parties to it. Therefore: you deny having caused any
dissension, Baroness?

BARONESS. Indeed, I do! And it is not the fault of one that two
quarrel.

JUDGE. This is no quarrel, Baroness, but a criminal case;
and furthermore, you seem now to be displaying a contentious
temperament as well as inconsiderate behaviour.

BARONESS. Then you don't know my husband.

JUDGE. Will you please explain yourself, for I can base no
decision on mere insinuations.

BARON. Then I must ask to have the case dismissed, so that I can
obtain separation in other ways.

JUDGE. The case is already before the Court and will have to be
carried to its conclusion--Baroness, you maintain then that your
husband has caused the estrangement. Can this be proved?

BARONESS. Yes, it can be proved.

JUDGE. Please do so then, but bear in mind that it is a question
of depriving the Baron of his parental rights and also of his
rights to the property.

BARONESS. He has forfeited it many times over, and not the least
when he denied me sleep and food.

BARON. I feel compelled to state that I have never refused to
let the Baroness sleep. I have merely asked her not to sleep
in the afternoon, because thereby the house was neglected and
the child left without proper care. As to food, I have always
left such matters to my wife, and I have only objected to some
extravagant entertainments, as the neglected household could not
bear such expenses.

BARONESS. And he has let me lie sick without calling in a
physician.

BARON. The Baroness would always be taken sick when she could
not have her own way, but that kind of ailment did not last long
as a rule. After I had brought a specialist from the city, and
he had declared it to be nothing but tricks, I did not judge it
necessary to call a physician the next time the Baroness was
taken sick--because the new pier-glass cost fifty crowns less
than originally intended.

JUDGE. All this is not of such nature that it can be considered
when such a serious case has to be decided. There must be some
deeper motives.

BARONESS. It ought to be counted a motive that the father will
not permit the mother to bring up her own child.

BARON. First of all, the Baroness left the care of the child to
a maid, and whenever she tried to assist, things went wrong.
Secondly, she tried to bring up the boy as a woman, and not as a
man. For instance, she dressed him as a girl until he was four
years old; and to this very day, when he is eight years old, he
carries his hair long as a girl, is forced to sew and crochet,
and plays with dolls; all of which I regard as injurious to the
child's normal development into a man. On the other hand, she
has amused herself by dressing up the daughters of our tenants
as boys, cutting their hair short, and putting them to work on
things generally handled by boys. In a word, I took charge of my
son's education because I noticed symptoms of mental derangement
which before this have led to offences against the Eighteenth
Chapter of the Criminal Code.

JUDGE. And yet you are now willing to leave the child in the
hands of the mother?

BARON. Yes, for I have never been able to contemplate such a
cruelty as to separate mother and child--and also because the
mother has promised to mend her ways. And for that matter, I had
only promised conditionally, and with the understanding that
the law was not to be invoked in the matter. But since we have
not been able to keep away from recriminations, I have changed
my mind--especially as, from being the complainant, I have been
turned into a defendant.

BARONESS. That's the way this man always keeps his promises.

BARON. My promises, like those of other people, have always been
conditional, and I have kept them as long as the conditions were
observed.

BARONESS. In the same way he had promised me personal freedom
within the marriage.

BARON. Naturally with the provision that the laws of decency
were kept inviolate; but when all bounds were exceeded, and
when ideas of license appeared under the name of freedom, then I
regarded my promise as annulled.

BARONESS. And for this reason he tormented me with the most
absurd jealousy, and that is generally enough to make a common
life unbearable. He even made himself ridiculous to the extent
of being jealous of the doctor.

BARON. This alleged jealousy may be reduced to an advice on my
part against the employment of a notorious and tattling masseur
for an ailment commonly treated by women--unless the Baroness is
having in mind the occasion when I showed our steward the door
for smoking in my drawing-room and offering cigars to my wife.

BARONESS. AS we have not been able to keep away from
scandal-mongering, it is just as well that the whole truth
should get out: the Baron has been guilty of adultery. Is not
this enough to make him unworthy of bringing up my child alone?

JUDGE. Can you prove this, Baroness?

BARONESS. Yes, I can, and here are letters that show.

JUDGE. [_Receiving the letters_] How long ago did this happen?

BARONESS. A year ago.

JUDGE. Of course, the time limit for prosecution has already
expired, but the fact itself weighs heavily against the husband
and may cause him to lose the child entirely as well as a part
of the marriage portion. Do you admit the truth of this charge,
Baron?

BARON. Yes, with remorse and mortification; but there were
circumstances which ought to be held extenuating. I was forced
into humiliating celibacy by the calculated coldness of the
Baroness, although I, and in all courtesy, asked as a favour,
what the law allowed me to demand as a right. I tired of buying
her love, she having prostituted our marriage by selling her
favours first for power and later for presents and money; and
in the end I found myself compelled, with the express consent of
the Baroness, to take up an irregular relationship.

JUDGE. Had you given your consent, Baroness?

BARONESS. No, that is not true! I demand proofs!

BARON. It is true, but I cannot prove it, since the only
witness, my wife, denies it.

JUDGE. What is unproved need not be untrue, but a com-pact of
this kind, trespassing upon prevailing laws, must be held a
_pactum turpe_ and invalid in itself. Baron, so far everything
is against you.

BARONESS. And as the Baron has confessed his guilt with remorse
and shame, I, who have now become complainant instead of
defendant, ask that the Court proceed to render a decision, as
further details are not needed.

JUDGE. In my capacity as presiding officer of this Court, I wish
to hear what the Baron has to say in justification, or at least
in palliation.

BARON. I have just admitted the charge of adultery and have
advanced as extenuating circumstances, partly that it was the
result of pressing need when, after ten years of married life,
I suddenly found myself unmarried, and partly that it was done
with the consent of the Baroness herself. As I have now come
to believe that all this was a trap set to make a case against
me, it is my duty, for the sake of my son, to hold back no
further----

BARONESS. [_Exclaims instinctively_] Axel!

BARON. What caused me to break my marital vows was the
faithlessness of the Baroness.

JUDGE. Baron, can you prove that the Baroness has been faithless
to you?

BARON. No! For I was concerned about the honour of the family,
and I destroyed all proofs that I obtained. But I still venture
to believe that, in this matter, the Baroness will stand by the
confession she once made to me.

JUDGE. Baroness, do you admit this offence as preceding and,
therefore, probably causing the lapse of the Baron?

BARONESS. No!

JUDGE. Are you willing to repeat under oath that you are
innocent of this charge?

BARONESS. Yes!

BARON. Good heavens! No, she must not do that! No perjury for my
sake!

JUDGE. I ask once more: is the Baroness willing to take the oath?

BARONESS. Yes.

BARON. Permit me to suggest that the Baroness just now appears
as complainant, and a complaint is not made under oath.

JUDGE. As you have charged her with a criminal offence, she is
defendant. What does the Jury hold?

EMMANUEL WICKBERG. As the Baroness is a party to this suit, it
seems to me that she can hardly be allowed to testify in her own
behalf.

SWEN OSCAR ERLIN. It seems to me that if the Baroness is to
testify under oath, then the Baron should also be allowed to do
so in the same matter, but as oath may not be put against oath,
the whole matter remains in the dark.

AUGUST ALEXANDER VASS. I should say that it is not a question of
testifying under oath here, but of taking an oath on one's own
innocence.

ANDERS ERIC RUTH. Well, isn't that the question which has to be
settled first of all?

AXEL WALLIN. But not in the presence of the parties, as the
deliberations of the Court are not public.

CARL JOHAN SJÖBERG. The right of the jury to express itself is
not limited or conditioned by secrecy.

JUDGE. Out of so many meanings I can get no guidance. But as the
guilt of the Baron can be proved, and that of the Baroness still
remains unproved, I must demand that the Baroness take oath on
her innocence.

BARONESS. I am ready!

JUDGE. No, wait a moment!--Baron, if you were granted time,
would you be able to produce evidence or witnesses in support of
your charge?

BARON. This I neither can nor will do, as I am not anxious to
see my dishonour made public.

JUDGE. The proceedings of the Court will be adjourned while I
consult with the chairman of the Vestry Board.

      [_Steps down and goes out to the right_.



SCENE X


      _The_ JURORS _confer in low tones among themselves_.

      _The_ BARON _and the_ BARONESS _in the background_.

      _The_ SPECTATORS _form groups and talk_.


BARON. [_To the_ BARONESS] You do not shrink from perjuring
yourself?

BARONESS. I shrink from nothing when my child is concerned.

BARON. But if I have proofs?

BARONESS. Well, you have not.

BARON. The letters were burned, but certified copies of them are
still in existence.

BARONESS. You lie to frighten me!

BARON. To show you how deeply I love my child, and to save the
mother at least, as I seem to be lost, you--may have the proofs.
But don't be ungrateful.

      [_Hands her a bundle of letters_.

BARONESS. That you are a liar, I knew before, but that you were
scoundrel enough to have the letters copied, that I could never
have believed.

BARON. That is your thanks! But now both of us are lost.

BARONESS. Yes, let both go down--then there will be an end to
the fight----

BARON. Is it better for the child to lose both its parents and
be left alone in the world?

BARONESS. That will never occur!

BARON. Your absurd conceit, which makes you think yourself
above all laws and above other human beings, has lured you into
starting this fight, in which there can be only one loser: our
son! What were you thinking of when you began this attack,
which could not fail to provoke a defence? Not of the child, I
am sure. But of revenge, I suppose? Revenge for what? For my
discovery of your guilt?

BARONESS. The child? Were you thinking of the child when you
dragged me in the mire before this rabble?

BARON. Helen!--Like wild beasts we have clawed each other
bloody. We have laid our disgrace open to all these who take
pleasure in our ruin, for in this room we have not a single
friend. Our child will after this never be able to speak of his
parents as respectable people; he will not be able to start life
with a recommendation from father and mother; he will see the
home shunned, the old parents isolated and despised, and so the
time must come when he will flee us!

BARONESS. What do you want then?

BARON. Let us leave the country after selling the property.

BARONESS. And begin the same squabble all over again! I know
what will happen: for a week you will be tame, and then you will
abuse me.

BARON. Just think--now they are settling our fate in there.
You cannot hope for a good word from the Pastor, whom you have
just called a liar; and I, who am known to be no Christian, can
expect no mercy either. Oh, I wish I were in the woods, so that
I could crawl in under some big roots or put my head under a
rock--this is more shame than I can bear!

BARONESS. It is true that the minister hates both of us, and it
may happen as you say. Why don't you speak to him?

BARON. Of what? Making up?

BARONESS. Of anything you please, if it only be not too late!
Oh, if it should be too late!--What can that man Alexandersson
want that makes him prowl about us two all the time? I am afraid
of that man!

BARON. Alexandersson is a nice fellow.

BARONESS. Yes, he is nice to you, but not to me--I have observed
those glances before--Go and see the Pastor now; but take my
hand first--I am scared!

BARON. Of what, dear, of what?

BARONESS. I don't know--Everything, everybody!

BARON. But not of me?

BARONESS. No, not now! It is as if our clothes had been caught
in the mill wheels, and we had been dragged into the machinery.
What have we been doing? What have we been doing in our anger?
How they will enjoy themselves, all these who are now seeing
the Baron and the Baroness stripped naked and flogging each
other--Oh, I feel as if I were standing here without a rag to
cover me.

      [_She buttons her coat_.

BARON. Calm yourself, my dear. It is not exactly the proper
place to tell you what I have said before: that there is only
one friend and one home--but we might start over again!--Well,
heaven knows! No, we cannot do it. You have gone too far. It is
all over. And this last--yes, let it be the last! And it had
to come after all the rest. No, we are enemies for life! And
if I let you go away with the child now, then you might marry
again--I see that now. And my child might have a step-father;
and I should have to watch another man going about with my wife
and child--Or I might myself be going about with somebody else's
wench hanging on my arm. No! Either you or I! One of us must be
struck down! You or I!

BARONESS. You! For if I let you take the child, you might marry
again, and I might have to see another woman taking my place
with my own child. The mere thought of it could make me a
murderess! A step-mother for _my_ child!

BARON. You might have thought of it before! But when you saw me
champing at the chain of love that bound me to you, then you
believed me incapable of loving anybody but yourself.

BARONESS. Do you think I ever loved you?

BARON. Yes, once at least. When I had been faithless to you.
Then your love grew sublime. And your pretended scorn made
you irresistible. But my error caused you to respect me, too.
Whether it was the male or the criminal you admired most, I
don't know, but I believe it was both--it must have been both,
for you are the most typical woman I have ever met. And now you
are already jealous of a new wife whom I have never thought
of. What a pity that you became my mate! As my mistress, your
victory would have been unchallenged, and your infidelities
would only have seemed the bouquet of my new wine.

BARONESS. Yes, your love was always material.

BARON. Material as everything spiritual, and spiritual as all
that is material! My weakness for you, which gave strength to
my feeling, made you believe yourself the stronger, when you
were simply coarser, more ill-natured, and more unscrupulous
than I.

BARONESS. You the stronger? You, who never want the same thing
two minutes in a stretch! You, who as a rule never know what you
want!

BARON. Yes, I know perfectly well what I want, but there is room
in me for both love and hatred, and while I love you one minute,
I hate you the next. And just now I hate you!

BARONESS. Are you now thinking of the child also?

BARON. Yes, now and always! And do you know why? Because he is
our love that has taken flesh. He is the memory of our beautiful
hours, the link that unites our souls, the common ground where
we must ever meet without wishing to do so. And that is why
we shall never be able to part, even if our separation be
declared--Oh, if I could only hate you as I want to!



SCENE XI


      _The_ JUDGE _and the_ PASTOR _enter in conversation
      and remain in the foreground_.


JUDGE. Thus I recognize the utter hopelessness of seeking
justice or discovering truth. And it seems to me as if the laws
were a couple of centuries behind our ideas of right. Did I not
have to punish Alexandersson, who was innocent, and exonerate
the girl, who was guilty of theft? And as for this separation
suit, I know nothing at all about it at this minute, and I
cannot take upon my conscience to render a decision.

PASTOR. But a decision has to be rendered.

JUDGE. Not by me! I shall give up my place and choose another
profession.

PASTOR. Why, such a scandal would only bring you notoriety and
close every career to you. Keep on judging a few years, and you
will come to think it quite easy to crush human fates like egg
shells. And for that matter, if you want to stand clear of this
case, let yourself be outvoted by the jury. Then they must take
the responsibility on themselves.

JUDGE. That is a way--and I suspect that they will be
practically at one against me, for I have formed an opinion in
this matter, which, however, is wholly intuitive and, therefore,
not to be trusted--I thank you for your advice.

SHERIFF. [_Who has been talking with_ Alexandersson, _steps up
to the_ JUDGE] In my capacity of public prosecutor, I have to
report the farmer Alexandersson as a witness against Baroness
Sprengel.

JUDGE. In relation to the adultery charge?

SHERIFF. Yes.

JUDGE. [_To the_ PASTOR] Here is a new clue that may lead to a
solution.

PASTOR. Oh, there are lots of clues, if you can only get hold of
them.

JUDGE. But nevertheless it is horrible to see two persons who
have loved trying to ruin each other. It is like being in a
slaughter-house!

PASTOR. Well, that is love, Judge!

JUDGE. What then is hatred?

PASTOR. It is the lining of the coat.

[_The_ JUDGE _goes over and speaks to the_ Jurors.

BARONESS. [_Comes forward to the_ PASTOR] Help us, Pastor! Help
us!

PASTOR. I cannot, and as a clergyman, I must not. And
furthermore, did I not warn you not to play with such serious
matters? You thought it so simple to part! Well, part then! The
law will not prevent you, so don't put the blame on it.



SCENE XII


      All _as before_.

JUDGE. The Court will now resume its proceedings. According
to the report of the public prosecutor, Sheriff Wiberg, a new
witness has appeared against the Baroness and is ready to affirm
her guilt under the charge of adultery. Farmer Alexandersson!

ALEXANDERSSON. I am here.

JUDGE. How can you prove your assertion?

ALEXANDERSSON. I saw the offence committed.

BARONESS. He is lying! Let him bring proof!

ALEXANDERSSON. Proof? I'm a witness now, ain't I?

BARONESS. Your assertion is no proof, although you happen to be
called a witness for the moment.

ALEXANDERSSON. Maybe the witness has to have two more witnesses,
and those still others?

BARONESS. Yes, it might be needed when one cannot tell whether
the whole lot are lying or not.

BARON. The testimony of Alexandersson will not be required. I
beg leave to offer the Court all the correspondence by which
the marital infidelity of the Baroness stands completely
proved--Here are the originals; copies of them will be found in
the possession of defendant.

      [_The_ BARONESS _utters a cry but controls herself
      quickly_.

JUDGE. And yet, Baroness, you were willing to take the oath a
little while ago?

BARONESS. But I didn't take it! And now I think the Baron and I
may cry quits.

JUDGE. We do not let one crime cancel another. The account of
each one has to be settled separately.

BARONESS. Then I want to file a claim at once against the Baron
for my dowry which he has squandered.

JUDGE. If you have squandered your wife's dowry, Baron, it might
be well to settle that matter right here.

BARON. The Baroness brought with her six thousand crowns in
stock that was then unsalable and soon became wholly worthless.
As at the time of our marriage she held a position as a
telegrapher and declared herself unwilling to take support from
her husband, we made a marriage contract and agreed that each
one should be self-supporting. But she lost her position after
the marriage, and I have been supporting her ever since. To this
I had no objection whatever, but as she is now putting in bills,
I shall ask leave to present one of my own to meet hers. It
totals up to thirty-five thousand crowns, this being one-third
of the household expenses since the beginning of our marriage,
and I being willing to take two-thirds upon myself.

JUDGE. Have you this agreement in black and white, Baron?

BARON. I have not.

JUDGE. Have you any documents to prove the disposition of your
dowry, Baroness?

BARONESS. I didn't think at the time it would be necessary to
get anything in writing, as I supposed myself to be dealing with
honourable people.

JUDGE. Then this whole question cannot come under consideration
here. The jury will please step into the small court-room for
discussion of the case and formulation of a decision.



SCENE XIII


      _The_ JURY _and the_ JUDGE _go out to the right_.


ALEXANDERSSON. [_To the_ Sheriff] This here justice is more than
I can get any sense out of.

SHERIFF. I think it would be wiser for you to go right home
now, or you might have the same experience as the farmer from
Mariestad. Did you ever hear of it?

ALEXANDERSSON. No.

SHERIFF. Well, he went to court as spectator, was dragged into
the case as witness, became a party to it, and ended up with a
flogging at the whipping-post.

ALEXANDERSSON. Oh, hell! But I believe it of 'em! I believe
anything of 'em! [_Goes out_.

      _The_ BARON _joins the_ BARONESS _in the foreground_.

BARONESS. You find it hard to keep away from me.

BARON. Now I have struck you down, and I am bleeding to death
myself, for your blood is mine----

BARONESS. And how clever you are at making out bills!

BARON. Only when it comes to counter-claims! Your courage is
that of despair, or that of a person sentenced to death. And
when you leave here, you will collapse. Then you will no longer
be able to load your sorrow and guilt on me, and you will be
suffering from remorse. Do you know why I have not killed you?

BARONESS. Because you did not dare!

BARON. No! Not even the thought of hell could have held me
back--for I don't believe in it. But this was the thought that
did it: even if you get the child, you will be gone in five
years. That is what the doctor tells me. And then the child
might be left without either father or mother. Think of it--all
alone in the world!

BARONESS. Five years!--It is a lie!

BARON. In five years! And then I am left behind with the child
whether you want it or not.

BARONESS. Oh no! For then my family will bring suit to get the
child away from you. I don't die when I die!

BARON. Evil never dies! That is so! But can you explain why you
grudge me the child, and grudge the child me, whom it needs?
Is it sheer malice--a craving for revenge that punishes the
child? [_The_ BARONESS _remains silent_] Do you know, I remarked
to the Pastor that I thought possibly you might have some
doubts concerning the child's parentage, and that this might
be a reason why you would not let me have the child, lest my
happiness be built on a false foundation. And he replied: No,
I don't think her capable of it--not of such a fine motive--I
don't think you know yourself what makes you so fanatical about
this one thing: it is the yearning for continued existence that
goads you into maintaining your hold. Our son has your body, but
my soul, and that soul you cannot rid him of. In him you will
have me back when you least expect it; in him you will find my
thoughts, my tastes, my passions, and for this reason you will
hate him one day, as you hate me now. That is what I fear!

BARONESS. You seem still a little afraid that he may become mine?

BARON. In your quality of mother and woman, you have a certain
advantage over me with our judges, and although justice may
throw dice blindfolded, there is always a little lead on one
side of each die.

BARONESS. You know how to pay compliments even in the moment of
separation. Perhaps you don't hate me as much as you pretend?

BARON. Frankly speaking, I think that I hate not so much you as
my dishonour, though you, too, come in for a share. And why this
hatred? Perhaps I have overlooked that you are near the forties,
and that a masculine element is making its appearance in you.
Perhaps it is this element that I notice in your kisses, in your
embraces--perhaps that is what I find so repulsive?

BARONESS. Perhaps. For the sorrow of my life has been, as you
well know, that I was not born a man.

BARON. Perhaps that became the sorrow of my life! And now you
try to avenge yourself on nature for having played with you, and
so you want to bring up your son as a woman. Will you promise me
one thing?

BARONESS. Will you promise me one thing?

BARON. What is the use of promising?

BARONESS. No, let us give no more promises.

BARON. Will you answer a question truthfully?

BARONESS. If I told the truth, you would think I lied.

BARON. Yes, so I should!

BARONESS. Can you see now that all is over, for ever?

BARON. For ever! It was for ever that we once swore to love each
other.

BARONESS. It is too bad that such oaths must be taken!

BARON. Why so? It is always a bond, such as it is.

BARONESS. I never could bear with bonds!

BARON. Do you think it would have been better for us not to bind
ourselves?

BARONESS. Better for me, yes.

BARON. I wonder. For then you could not have bound me.

BARONESS. Nor you me.

BARON. And so the result would have been the same--as when
you reduce fractions. Consequently: not the law's fault; not
our own; not anybody else's. And yet we have to assume the
responsibility! [_The_ SHERIFF _approaches_] So! Now the verdict
has been pronounced--Good-bye, Helen!

BARONESS. Good-bye--Axel!

BARON. It is hard to part! And impossible to live together. But
the fight is over at least!

BARONESS. If it were! I fear it is just about to begin.

SHERIFF. The parties will retire while the Court takes action.

BARONESS. Axel, a word before it is too late! After all, they
might take the child away from both of us. Drive home and take
the boy to your mother, and then we will flee from here, far
away!

BARON. I think you are trying to fool me again.

BARONESS. No, I am not. I am no longer thinking of you, or of
myself, or of my revenge. Save the child only! Listen, Axel--you
must do it!

BARON. I will. But if you are deceiving me--Never mind: I'll do
it!

      _Goes out quickly. The_ BARONESS _leaves through the
      door in the background_.



SCENE XIV


      _The_ JURY _and the_ JUDGE _enter and resume their
      seats_.


JUDGE. As we now have the case complete before us, I shall ask
each juror separately to state his opinion before decision is
rendered. Personally, I can only hold it reasonable that the
child be given to the mother, as both parties are equally to
blame for the estrangement, and as the mother must be held
better adapted to the care of the child than the father.
[_Silence_.

ALEXANDER EKLUND. According to prevailing law, it is the wife
who takes her rank and condition from the husband, not the
husband from the wife.

EMMANUEL WICKBERG. And the husband is the proper guardian of his
wife.

CARL JOHAN SJÖBERG. The ritual, which gives binding force to the
marriage, says that the wife should obey her husband, and so it
is clear to me that the man takes precedence of the woman.

ERIC OTTO BOMAN. And the children are to be brought up in the
faith of the father.

ÄRENFRID SÖDERBERG. From which may be concluded that children
follow the father and not the mother.

OLOF ANDERSSON OF WIK. But as in the case before us both man and
wife are equally guilty, and, judging by what has come to light,
equally unfit to rear a child, I hold that the child should be
taken away from both.

CARL PETER ANDERSSON OF BERGA. In concurring with Olof
Andersson, I may call to mind that in such cases the Court
names two good men as guardians to take charge of children and
property, so that out of the latter man and wife may have their
support together with the child.

AXEL WALLIN. And for guardians I wish in this case to propose
Alexander Eklund and Ärenfrid Söderberg, both of whom are well
known to be of honest character and Christian disposition.

ANDERS ERIC RUTH. I concur with Olof Andersson of Wik as to the
separation of the child from both father and mother, and with
Axel Wallin as to the guardians, whose Christian disposition
makes them particularly fitted to bring up the child.

SWEN OSCAR ERLING. I concur in what has just been said.

AUGUST ALEXANDER VASS. I concur.

LUDWIG ÖSTMAN. I concur.

JUDGE. AS the opinion expressed by a majority of the jurors is
contrary to my own, I must ask the Jury to take a vote on the
matter. And I think it proper first to put the motion made by
Olof Andersson for the separation of the child from both father
and mother, and for the appointment of guardians. Is it the
unanimous will of the Jury that such action be taken?

ALL THE JURORS. Yes.

JUDGE. If anybody objects to the motion, he will hold up his
hand. [_Silence_] The opinion of the Jury has won out against my
own, and I shall enter an exception on the minutes against what
seems to me the needless cruelty of the decision--The couple
will then be sentenced to a year's separation of bed and board,
at the risk of imprisonment if, during that period, they should
seek each other. [_To the_ SHERIFF] Call in the parties.



SCENE XV


      _The_ BARONESS _and_ SPECTATORS _enter_.


JUDGE. Is Baron Sprengel not present?

BARONESS. The Baron will be here in a moment.

JUDGE. Whoever does not observe the time, has only himself to
blame. This is the decision of the County Court: that husband
and wife be sentenced to a year's separation of bed and board,
and that the child be taken from the parents and placed in
charge of two guardians for education. For this purpose the
Court has selected and appointed the jurors Alexander Eklund and
Ärenfrid Söderberg.

      _The_ BARONESS _cries out and sinks to the floor.
      The_ SHERIFF _and the_ CONSTABLE _raise her up and
      place her on a chair. Some of the_ SPECTATORS _leave
      in the meantime_.

BARON. [_Enters_] Your Honor! I heard the sentence of the
Court from the outside, and I wish to enter a challenge, first
against the Jury as a whole, it being made up of my personal
enemies, and secondly against the guardians, Alexander Eklund
and Ärenfrid Söderberg, neither of whom possesses the financial
status demanded of guardians. Furthermore, I shall enter
proceedings against the judge for incompetence displayed in the
exercise of his office, in so far as he has failed to recognise
that the primary guilt of one led to the subsequent guilt of the
other, so that both cannot be held equally responsible.

JUDGE. Whosoever be not satisfied with the decision rendered may
appeal to the higher court within the term set by law. Will the
Jury please accompany me on house visitation to the Rectory in
connection with the suit pending against the communal assessors?

      _The_ JUDGE _and the_ JURY _go out through the door
      in the background_.



SCENE XVI


      _The_ BARON _and the_ BARONESS. _The_ SPECTATORS
      _withdraw gradually_.


BARONESS. Where is Emil?

BARON. He was gone!

BARONESS. That's a lie!

BARON. [_After a pause_] Yes--I did not bring him to my mother,
whom I cannot trust, but to the Rectory.

BARONESS. To the minister!

BARON. Your one reliable enemy! Yes. Who was there else that I
might trust? And I did it because a while ago I caught a glance
in your eye which made me think that you possibly might kill
yourself and the child.

BARONESS. You saw that!--Oh, why did I let myself be fooled into
believing you.

BARON. Well, what do you say of all this?

BARONESS. I don't know. But I am so tired that I no longer feel
the blows. It seems almost a relief to have received the final
stab.

BARON. You give no thought to what is now going to happen:
how your son is going to be brought up by two peasants, whose
ignorance and rude habits will kill the child by slow torture;
how he is going to be forced down into their narrow sphere;
how his intelligence is going to be smothered by religious
superstition; how he is going to be taught contempt for his
father and mother----

BARONESS. Hush! Don't say another word, or I shall lose my
reason! My Emil in the hands of peasant women, who don't know
enough to wash themselves, who have their beds full of vermin,
and who cannot even keep a comb clean! My Emil! No, it is
impossible!

BARON. It is the actual reality, and you have nobody but
yourself to blame for it.

BARONESS. Myself? But did I make myself? Did I put evil
tendencies, hatred, and wild passions into myself? No! And who
was it that denied me the power and will to combat all those
things?--When I look at myself this moment, I feel that I am to
be pitied. Am I not?

BARON. Yes, you are! Both of us are to be pitied. We tried to
avoid the rocks that beset marriage by living unmarried as
husband and wife; but nevertheless we quarrelled, and we were
sacrificing one of life's greatest joys, the respect of our
fellow-men--and so we were married. But we must needs steal a
march on the social body and its laws. We wanted no religious
ceremony, but instead we wriggled into a civil marriage. We did
not want to depend on each other--we were to have no common
pocket-book and to insist on no personal ownership of each
other--and with that we fell right back into the old rut again.
Without wedding ceremony, but with a marriage contract! And
then it went to pieces. I forgave your faithlessness, and for
the child's sake we lived together in voluntary separation--and
freedom! But I grew tired of introducing my friend's mistress as
my wife--and so we had to get a divorce. Can you guess--do you
know against whom we have been fighting? You call him God, but I
call him nature. And that was the master who egged us on to hate
each other, just as he is egging people on to love each other.
And now we are condemned to keep on tearing each other as long
as a spark of life remains. New proceedings in the higher court,
reopening of the case, report by the Vestry Board, opinion
from the Diocesan Chapter, decision by the Supreme Court. Then
comes my complaint to the Attorney-General, my application for
a guardian, your objections and counter-suits: from pillory to
post! Without hope of a merciful executioner! Neglect of the
property, financial ruin, scamped education for the child! And
why do we not put an end to these two miserable lives? Because
the child stays our hands! You cry, but I cannot! Not even when
my thought runs ahead to the night that is waiting for me in a
home laid waste! And you, poor Helen, who must go back to your
mother! That mother whom you once left with such eagerness in
order to get a home of your own. To become her daughter once
more--and perhaps find it worse than being a wife! One year! Two
years! Many years! How many more do you think we can bear to
suffer?

BARONESS. I shall never go back to my mother. Never! I shall go
out on the high-roads and into the woods so that I may find a
hiding-place where I can scream--scream myself tired against
God, who has put this infernal love into the world as a torment
for us human creatures--and when night comes, I shall seek
shelter in the Pastor's barn, so that I may sleep near my child.

BARON. You hope to sleep to-night--you?

_Curtain_.




THE DANCE OF DEATH

1901




PART I




CHARACTERS


EDGAR, _Captain in the Coast Artillery_
ALICE, _his wife_, _a former actress_
CURT, _Master of Quarantine_
JENNY         }
THE OLD WOMAN } _Subordinate characters_
THE SENTRY    }




THE DANCE OF DEATH


PART I


      _The scene is laid inside of a round fort built of
      granite_.

      _In the background, a gateway, closed by huge,
      swinging double doors; in these, small square window
      panes, through which may be seen a sea shore with
      batteries and the sea beyond_.

      _On either side of the gateway, a window with flower
      pots and bird cages_.

      _To the right of the gateway, an upright piano;
      further down the stage, a sewing-table and two
      easy-chairs_.

      _On the left, half-way down the stage, a
      writing-table with a telegraph instrument on it;
      further down, a what-not full of framed photographs.
      Beside it, a couch that can be used to sleep on.
      Against the wall, a buffet_.

      _A lamp suspended from the ceiling. On the wall near
      the piano hang two large laurel wreaths with ribbons.
      Between them, the picture of a woman in stage dress_.

      _Beside the door, a hat-stand on which hang
      accoutrements, sabres, and so forth. Near it, a
      chiffonier_.

      _To the left of the gateway hangs a mercurial
      barometer_.

      _It is a mild Fall evening. The doors stand open, and
      a sentry is seen pacing back and forth on the shore
      battery. He wears a helmet with a forward pointed
      brush for a crest. Now and then his drawn sabre
      catches the red glare of the setting sun. The sea
      lies dark and quiet_.

      _The_ CAPTAIN _sits in the easy-chair to the left of
      the sewing-table, fumbling an extinguished cigar. He
      has on a much-worn undress uniform and riding-boots
      with spurs. Looks tired and bored_.

      ALICE _sits in the easy-chair on the right, doing
      nothing at all. Looks tired and expectant_.


CAPTAIN. Won't you play something for me?

ALICE. [_Indifferently, but not snappishly_] What am I to play?

CAPTAIN. Whatever suits you.

ALICE. You don't like my repertory.

CAPTAIN. Nor you mine.

ALICE. [_Evasively_] Do you want the doors to stay open?

CAPTAIN. If you wish it.

ALICE. Let them be, then. [_Pause_] Why don't you smoke?

CAPTAIN. Strong tobacco is beginning not to agree with me.

ALICE. [_In an almost friendly tone_] Get weaker tobacco then.
It is your only pleasure, as you call it.

CAPTAIN. Pleasure--what is that?

ALICE. Don't ask me. I know it as little as you--Don't you want
your whiskey yet?

CAPTAIN. I'll wait a little. What have you for supper?

ALICE. How do I know? Ask Christine.

CAPTAIN. The mackerel ought to be in season soon--now the Fall
is here.

ALICE. Yes, it is Fall!

CAPTAIN. Within and without. But leaving aside the cold that
comes with the Fall, both within and without, a little broiled
mackerel, with a slice of lemon and a glass of white Burgundy,
wouldn't be so very bad.

ALICE. Now you grow eloquent.

CAPTAIN. Have we any Burgundy left in the wine-cellar?

ALICE. So far as I know, we have had no wine-cellar these last
five years----

CAPTAIN. You never know anything. However, we _must_ stock up
for our silver wedding.

ALICE. Do you actually mean to celebrate it?

CAPTAIN. Of course!

ALICE. It would be more seemly to hide our misery--our
twenty-five years of misery----

CAPTAIN. My dear Alice, it has been a misery, but we have also
had some fun--now and then. One has to avail one-self of what
little time there is, for afterward it is all over.

ALICE. Is it over? Would that it were!

CAPTAIN. It is over! Nothing left but what can be put on a
wheel-barrow and spread on the garden beds.

ALICE. And so much trouble for the sake of the garden beds!

CAPTAIN. Well, that's the way of it. And it is not of my making.

ALICE. So much trouble! [_Pause_] Did the mail come?

CAPTAIN. Yes.

ALICE. Did the butcher send his bill?

CAPTAIN. Yes.

ALICE. How large is it?

CAPTAIN. [_Takes a paper from his pocket and puts on his
spectacles, but takes them off again at once_] Look at it
yourself. I cannot see any longer.

ALICE. What is wrong with your eyes?

CAPTAIN. Don't know.

ALICE. Growing old?

CAPTAIN. Nonsense! I?

ALICE. Well, not I!

CAPTAIN. Hm!

ALICE. [_Looking at the bill_] Can you pay it?

CAPTAIN. Yes, but not this moment.

ALICE. Some other time, of course! In a year, when you have been
retired with a small pension, and it is too late! And then, when
your trouble returns----

CAPTAIN. Trouble? I never had any trouble--only a slight
indisposition once. And I can live another twenty years.

ALICE. The doctor thought otherwise.

CAPTAIN. The doctor!

ALICE. Yes, who else could express any valid opinion about
sickness?

CAPTAIN. I have no sickness, and never had. I am not going to
have it either, for I shall die all of a sudden--like an old
soldier.

ALICE. Speaking of the doctor--you know they are having a party
to-night?

CAPTAIN. [_Agitated_] Yes, what of it? We are not invited
because we don't associate with those people, and we don't
associate with them because we don't want to--because we despise
both of them. Rabble--that's what they are!

ALICE. You say that of everybody.

CAPTAIN. Because everybody is rabble.

ALICE. Except yourself.

CAPTAIN. Yes, because I have behaved decently under all
conditions of life. That's why I don't belong to the rabble.

[_Pause_.

ALICE. Do you want to play cards?

CAPTAIN. All right.

ALICE. [_Takes a pack of cards from the drawer in the
sewing-table and begins to shuffle them_] Just think, the doctor
is permitted to use the band for a private entertainment!

CAPTAIN. [_Angrily_] That's because he goes to the city and
truckles to the Colonel. Truckle, you know--if one could only do
that!

ALICE. [_Deals_] I used to be friendly with Gerda, but she
played me false----

CAPTAIN. They are all false! What did you turn up for trumps?

ALICE. Put on your spectacles.

CAPTAIN. They are no help--Well, well!

ALICE. Spades are trumps.

CAPTAIN. [_Disappointed_] Spades----?

ALICE. [_Leads_] Well, be that as it may, our case is settled in
advance with the wives of the new officers.

CAPTAIN. [_Taking the trick_] What does it matter? We never
give any parties anyhow, so nobody is the wiser. I can live by
myself--as I have always done.

ALICE. I, too. But the children? The children have to grow up
without any companionship.

CAPTAIN. Let them find it for themselves in the city--I take
that! Got any trumps left?

ALICE. One--That's mine!

CAPTAIN. Six and eight make fifteen----

ALICE. Fourteen--fourteen!

CAPTAIN. Six and eight make fourteen. I think I am also
forgetting how to count. And two makes sixteen--[_Yawns_] It is
your deal.

ALICE. You are tired?

CAPTAIN. [_Dealing_] Not at all.

ALICE. [_Listening in direction of the open doors_] One can hear
the music all this way. [_Pause_] Do you think Curt is invited
also?

CAPTAIN. He arrived this morning, so I guess he has had time to
get out his evening clothes, though he has not had time to call
on us.

ALICE. Master of Quarantine--is there to be a quarantine station
here?

CAPTAIN. Yes.

ALICE. He is my own cousin after all, and once I bore the same
name as he----

CAPTAIN. In which there was no particular honour----

ALICE. See here! [_Sharply_] You leave my family alone, and I'll
leave yours!

CAPTAIN. All right, all right--don't let us begin again!

ALICE. Must the Master of Quarantine be a physician?

CAPTAIN. Oh, no, he's merely a sort of superintendent or
book-keeper--and Curt never became anything in particular.

ALICE. He was not much good----

CAPTAIN. And he has cost us a lot of money. And when he left
wife and children, he became disgraced.

ALICE. Not quite so severe, Edgar!

CAPTAIN. That's what happened! What has he been doing in America
since then? Well, I cannot say that I am longing for him--but he
was a nice chap, and I liked to argue with him.

ALICE. Because he was so tractable----

CAPTAIN. [_Haughtily_] Tractable or not, he was at least a man
one could talk to. Here, on this island, there is not _one_
person who understands what I say--it's a community of idiots!

ALICE. It is rather strange that Curt should arrive just in time
for our silver wedding--whether we celebrate it or not----

CAPTAIN. Why is that strange? Oh, I see! It was he who brought
us together, or got you married, as they put it.

ALICE. Well, didn't he?

CAPTAIN. Certainly! It was a kind of fixed idea with him--I
leave it for you to say what kind.

ALICE. A wanton fancy----

CAPTAIN. For which we have had to pay, and not he!

ALICE. Yes, think only if I had remained on the stage! All my
friends are stars now.

CAPTAIN. [_Rising_] Well, well, well! Now I am going to have
a drink. [_Goes over to the buffet and mixes a drink, which
he takes standing up_] There should be a rail here to put the
foot on, so that one might dream of being at Copenhagen, in the
American Bar.

ALICE. Let us put a rail there, if it will only remind us of
Copenhagen. For there we spent our best moments.

CAPTAIN. [_Drinks quickly_] Yes, do you remember that "navarin
aux pommes"?

ALICE. No, but I remember the concerts at the Tivoli.

CAPTAIN. Yes, your tastes are so--exalted!

ALICE. It ought to please you to have a wife whose taste is good.

CAPTAIN. So it does.

ALICE. Sometimes, when you need something to brag of----

CAPTAIN. [_Drinking_] I guess they must be dancing at
the doctor's--I catch the three-four time of the tuba:
boom-boom-boom!

ALICE. I can hear the entire melody of the Alcazar Waltz. Well,
it was not yesterday I danced a waltz----

CAPTAIN. You think you could still manage?

ALICE. Still?

CAPTAIN. Ye-es. I guess you are done with dancing, you like me!

ALICE. I am ten years younger than you.

CAPTAIN. Then we are of the same age, as the lady should be ten
years younger.

ALICE. Be ashamed of yourself! You are an old man--and I am
still in my best years.

CAPTAIN. Oh, I know, you can be quite charming--to others, when
you make up your mind to it.

ALICE. Can we light the lamp now?

CAPTAIN. Certainly.

ALICE. Will you ring, please.

      _The_ CAPTAIN _goes languidly to the writing-table
      and rings a bell_.

      JENNY _enters from the right_.

CAPTAIN. Will you be kind enough to light the lamp, Jenny?

ALICE. [_Sharply_] I want you to light the hanging lamp.

JENNY. Yes, ma'am.

      [_Lights the lamp while the_ CAPTAIN _watches her_.

ALICE. [_Stiffly_] Did you wipe the chimney?

JENNY. Sure.

ALICE. What kind of an answer is that?

CAPTAIN. Now--now----

ALICE. [_To_ Jenny] Leave us. I will light the lamp myself. That
will be better.

JENNY: I think so too. [_Starts for the door_.

ALICE. [_Rising_] Go!

JENNY. [_Stops_] I wonder, ma'am, what you'd say if I did go?

      ALICE _remains silent_.

      JENNY _goes out_.

      _The_ CAPTAIN _comes forward and lights the lamp_.

ALICE. [_With concern_] Do you think she will go?

CAPTAIN. Shouldn't wonder. And then we are in for it----

ALICE. It's your fault! You spoil them.

CAPTAIN. Not at all. Can't you see that they are always polite
to me?

ALICE. Because you cringe to them. And you always cringe to
inferiors, for that matter, because, like all despots, you have
the nature of a slave.

CAPTAIN. There--there!

ALICE. Yes, you cringe before your men, and before your
sergeants, but you cannot get on with your equals or your
superiors.

CAPTAIN. Ugh!

ALICE. That's the way of all tyrants--Do you think she will go?

CAPTAIN. Yes, if you don't go out and say something nice to her.

ALICE. I?

CAPTAIN. Yes, for if I should do it, you would say that I was
flirting with the maids.

ALICE. Mercy, if she should leave! Then I shall have to do the
work, as I did the last time, and my hands will be spoiled.

CAPTAIN. That is not the worst of it. But if Jenny leaves,
Christine will also leave, and then we shall never get a servant
to the island again. The mate on the steamer scares away every
one that comes to look for a place--and if he should miss his
chance, then my corporals attend to it.

ALICE. Yes, your corporals, whom I have to feed in my kitchen,
and whom you dare not show the door----

CAPTAIN. No, for then they would also go when their terms were
up--and we might have to close up the whole gun shop!

ALICE. It will be our ruin.

CAPTAIN. That's why the officers have proposed to petition His
Royal Majesty for special expense money.

ALICE. For whom?

CAPTAIN. For the corporals.

ALICE. [_Laughing_] You are crazy!

CAPTAIN. Yes, laugh a little for me. I need it.

ALICE. I shall soon have forgotten how to laugh----

CAPTAIN. [_Lighting his cigar_] That is something one should
never forget--it is tedious enough anyhow!

ALICE. Well, it is not very amusing--Do you want to play any
more?

CAPTAIN. No, it tires me.

ALICE. Do you know, it irritates me nevertheless that my cousin,
the new Master of Quarantine, makes his first visit to our
enemies.

CAPTAIN. Well, what's the use of talking about it?

ALICE. But did you see in the paper that he was put down as
_rentier_? He must have come into some money then.

CAPTAIN. _Rentier_! Well, well--a rich relative. That's really
the first one in this family.

ALICE. In your family, yes. But among my people many have been
rich.

CAPTAIN. If he has money, he's conceited, I suppose, but I'll
hold him in check--and he won't get a chance to look at my cards.

      _The telegraph receiver begins to click_.

ALICE. Who is it?

CAPTAIN. [_Standing still_] Keep quiet, please.

ALICE. Well, are you not going to look----

CAPTAIN. I can hear--I can hear what they are saying--It's the
children.

      _Goes over to the instrument and sends an answer; the
      receiver continues to click for awhile, and then the_
      CAPTAIN _answers again_.

ALICE. Well?

CAPTAIN. Wait a little--[_Gives a final click_] The children are
at the guard-house in the city. Judith is not well again and is
staying away from school.

ALICE. Again! What more did they say?

CAPTAIN. Money, of course!

ALICE. Why is Judith in such a hurry? If she didn't pass her
examinations until next year, it would be just as well.

CAPTAIN. Tell her, and see what it helps.

ALICE. You should tell her.

CAPTAIN. How many times have I not done so? But children have
their own wills, you know.

ALICE. Yes, in this house at least. [_The_ CAPTAIN _yawns_] So,
you yawn in your wife's presence!

CAPTAIN. Well, what can I do? Don't you notice how day by day we
are saying the same things to each other? When, just now, you
sprang that good old phrase of yours, "in this house at least,"
I should have come back with my own stand-by, "it is not my
house only." But as I have already made that reply some five
hundred times, I yawned instead. And my yawn could be taken to
mean either that I was too lazy to answer, or "right you are, my
angel," or "supposing we quit."

ALICE. You are very amiable to-night.

CAPTAIN. Is it not time for supper soon?

ALICE. Do you know that the doctor ordered supper from the
city--from the Grand Hotel?

CAPTAIN. No! Then they are having ptarmigans--tschk! Ptarmigan,
you know, is the finest bird there is, but it's clear barbarism
to fry it in bacon grease----

ALICE. Ugh! Don't talk of food.

CAPTAIN. Well, how about wines? I wonder what those barbarians
are drinking with the ptarmigans?

ALICE. Do you want me to play for you?

CAPTAIN. [_Sits down at the writing-table_] The last resource!
Well, if you could only leave your dirges and lamentations
alone--it sounds too much like music with a moral. And I am
always adding within myself: "Can't you hear how unhappy I am!
Meow, meow! Can't you hear what a horrible husband I have! Brum,
brum, brum! If he would only die soon! Beating of the joyful
drum, flourishes, the finale of the Alcazar Waltz, Champagne
Galop!" Speaking of champagne, I guess there are a couple of
bottles left. What would you say about bringing them up and
pretending to have company?

ALICE. No, we won't, for they are mine--they were given to me
personally.

CAPTAIN. You are so economical.

ALICE. And you are always stingy--to your wife at least!

CAPTAIN. Then I don't know what to suggest. Perhaps I might
dance for you?

ALICE. No, thank you--I guess you are done with dancing.

CAPTAIN. You should bring some friend to stay with you.

ALICE. Thanks! You might bring a friend to stay with you.

CAPTAIN. Thanks! It has been tried, and with mutual
dissatisfaction. But it was interesting in the way of an
experiment, for as soon as a stranger entered the house, we
became quite happy--to begin with----

ALICE. And then!

CAPTAIN. Oh, don't talk of it!

      _There is a knock at the door on the left_.

ALICE. Who can be coming so late as this?

CAPTAIN. Jenny does not knock.

ALICE. Go and open the door, and don't yell "come"--it has a
sound of the workshop.

CAPTAIN. [_Goes toward the door on the left_] You don't like
workshops.

ALICE. Please, open!

CAPTAIN. [_Opens the door and receives a visiting-card that is
held out to him_] It is Christine--Has Jenny left? [_As the
public cannot hear the answer, to_ ALICE] Jenny has left.

ALICE. Then I become servant girl again!

CAPTAIN. And I man-of-all-work.

ALICE. Would it not be possible to get one of your gunners to
help along in the kitchen?

CAPTAIN. Not these days.

ALICE. But it couldn't be Jenny who sent in her card?

CAPTAIN. [_Looks at the card through his spectacles and then
turns it over to_ ALICE] You see what it is--I cannot.

ALICE. [_Looks at the card_] Curt--it is Curt! Hurry up and
bring him in.

CAPTAIN. [_Goes out to the left_] Curt! Well, that's a pleasure!

      [ALICE _arranges her hair and seems to come to life_.

CAPTAIN. [_Enters from the left with_ CURT] Here he is, the
traitor! Welcome, old man! Let me hug you!

ALICE. [_Goes to_ CURT] Welcome to my home, Curt!

CURT. Thank you--it is some time since we saw each other.

CAPTAIN. How long? Fifteen years! And we have grown old----

ALICE. Oh, Curt has not changed, it seems to me.

CAPTAIN. Sit down, sit down! And first of all--the programme.
Have you any engagement for to-night?

CURT. I am invited to the doctor's, but I have not promised to
go.

ALICE. Then you will stay with your relatives.

CURT. That would seem the natural thing, but the doctor is my
superior, and I might have trouble afterward.

CAPTAIN. What kind of talk is that? I have never been afraid of
my superiors----

CURT. Fear or no fear, the trouble cannot be escaped.

CAPTAIN. On this island I am master. Keep behind my back, and
nobody will dare to touch you.

ALICE. Oh, be quiet, Edgar! [_Takes_ CURT _by the hand_] Leaving
both masters and superiors aside, you must stay with us. That
will be found both natural and proper.

CURT. Well, then--especially as I feel welcome here.

CAPTAIN. Why should you not be welcome? There is nothing between
us--[CURT _tries vainly to hide a sense of displeasure_] What
could there be? You were a little careless as a young man, but I
have forgotten all about it. I don't let things rankle.

      ALICE _looks annoyed. All three sit down at the
      sewing-table_.

ALICE. Well, you have strayed far and wide in the world?

CURT. Yes, and now I have found a harbour with you----

CAPTAIN. Whom you married off twenty-five years ago.

CURT. It was not quite that way, but it doesn't matter. It is
pleasing to see that you have stuck together for twenty-five
years.

CAPTAIN. Well, we have borne with it. Now and then it has been
so-so, but, as you say, we have stuck together. And Alice
has had nothing to complain of. There has been plenty of
everything--heaps of money. Perhaps you don't know that I am a
celebrated author--an author of text-books----

CURT. Yes, I recall that, when we parted, you had just published
a volume on rifle practice that was selling well. Is it still
used in the military schools?

CAPTAIN. It is still in evidence, and it holds its place as
number one, though they have tried to substitute a worse one
--which is being used now, but which is totally worthless.

      [_Painful silence_.

CURT. You have been travelling abroad, I have heard.

ALICE. We have been down to Copenhagen five times--think of it?

CAPTAIN. Well, you see, when I took Alice away from the stage----

ALICE. Oh, you took me?

CAPTAIN. Yes, I took you as a wife should be taken----

ALICE. How brave you have grown!

CAPTAIN. But as it was held up against me afterward that I had
spoiled her brilliant career--hm!--I had to make up for it
by promising to take my wife to Copenhagen--and this I have
kept--fully! Five times we have been there. Five [_holding up
the five fingers of the left hand_] Have you been in Copenhagen?

CURT. [_Smiling_] No, I have mostly been in America.

CAPTAIN. America? Isn't that a rotten sort of a country?

CURT. [_Unpleasantly impressed_] It is not Copenhagen.

ALICE. Have you--heard anything--from your children?

CURT. No.

ALICE. I hope you pardon me--but was it not rather inconsiderate
to leave them like that----

CURT. I didn't leave them, but the court gave them to the mother.

CAPTAIN. Don't let us talk of that now. I for my part think it
was lucky for you to get out of that mess.

CURT. [_To_ ALICE] How are your children?

ALICE. Well, thank you. They are at school in the city and will
soon be grown up.

CAPTAIN. Yes, they're splendid kids, and the boy has a brilliant
head--brilliant! He is going to join the General Staff----

ALICE. If they accept him!

CAPTAIN. Him? Who has the making of a War Minister in him!

CURT. From one thing to another. There is to be a quarantine
station here--against plague, cholera, and that sort of thing.
And the doctor will be my superior, as you know--what sort of
man is he?

CAPTAIN. Man? He is no man! He's an ignorant rascal!

CURT. [_To_ ALICE] That is very unpleasant for me.

ALICE. Oh, it is not quite as bad as Edgar makes it out, but I
must admit that I have small sympathy for the man----

CAPTAIN. A rascal, that's what he is. And that's what the
others are, too--the Collector of Customs, the Postmaster, the
telephone girl, the druggist, the pilot--what is it they call
him now?--the Pilot Master--rascals one and all--and that's why
I don't associate with them.

CURT. Are you on bad terms with all of them?

CAPTAIN. Every one!

ALICE. Yes, it is true that intercourse with those people is out
of the question.

CAPTAIN. It is as if all the tyrants of the country had been
sent to this island for safe-keeping.

ALICE. [_Ironically_] Exactly!

CAPTAIN. [_Good-naturedly_] Hm! Is that meant for me? I am no
tyrant--not in my own house at least.

ALICE. You know better!

CAPTAIN. [_To_ CURT] Don't believe her! I am a very reasonable
husband, and the old lady is the best wife in the world.

ALICE. Would you like something to drink, Curt?

CURT. No, thank you, not now.

CAPTAIN. Have you turned----

CURT. A little moderate only----

CAPTAIN. Is that American?

CURT. Yes.

CAPTAIN. No moderation for me, or I don't care at all. A man
should stand his liquor.

CURT. Returning to our neighbours on the island--my position
will put me in touch with all of them--and it is not easy to
steer clear of everything, for no matter how little you care to
get mixed up in other people's intrigues, you are drawn into
them just the same.

ALICE. You had better take up with them--in the end you will
return to us, for here you find your true friends.

CURT. Is it not dreadful to be alone among a lot of enemies as
you are?

ALICE. It is not pleasant.

CAPTAIN. It isn't dreadful at all. I have never had anything
but enemies all my life, and they have helped me on instead of
doing me harm. And when my time to die comes, I may say that I
owe nothing to anybody, and that I have never got a thing for
nothing. Every particle of what I own I have had to fight for.

ALICE. Yes, Edgar's path has not been strewn with roses----

CAPTAIN. No, with thorns and stones--pieces of flint--but a
man's own strength: do you know what that means?

CURT. [_Simply_] Yes, I learned to recognise its insufficiency
about ten years ago.

CAPTAIN. Then you are no good!

ALICE. [_To the_ CAPTAIN] Edgar!

CAPTAIN. He is no good, I say, if he does not have the strength
within himself. Of course it is true that when the mechanism
goes to pieces there is nothing left but a barrowful to chuck
out on the garden beds; but as long as the mechanism holds
together the thing to do is to kick and fight, with hands and
feet, until there is nothing left. That is my philosophy.

CURT. [_Smiling_] It is fun to listen to you.

CAPTAIN. But you don't think it's true?

CURT. No, I don't.

CAPTAIN. But true it is, for all that.

      _During the preceding scene the wind has begun to
      blow hard, and now one of the big doors is closed
      with a bang_.

CAPTAIN. [_Rising_] It's blowing. I could just feel it coming.

      _Goes back and closes both doors. Knocks on the
      barometer_.

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] You will stay for supper?

CURT. Thank you.

ALICE. But it will be very simple, as our housemaid has just
left us.

CURT. Oh, it will do for me, I am sure.

ALICE. You ask for so little, dear Curt.

CAPTAIN. [_At the barometer_] If you could only see how the
mercury is dropping! Oh, I felt it coming!

ALICE. [_Secretly to_ CURT] He is nervous.

CAPTAIN. We ought to have supper soon.

ALICE. [_Rising_] I am going to see about it now. You can
sit here and philosophise--[_secretly to_ CURT], but don't
contradict him, for then he gets into bad humour. And don't ask
him why he was not made a major.

      [CURT _nods assent_.

      [ALICE _goes toward the right_.

CAPTAIN. See that we get something nice now, old lady!

ALICE. You give me money, and you'll get what you want.

CAPTAIN. Always money!

      [ALICE _goes out_.

CAPTAIN. [_To_ CURT] Money, money, money! All day long I have to
stand ready with the purse, until at last I have come to feel as
if I myself were nothing but a purse. Are you familiar with that
kind of thing?

CURT. Oh, yes--with the difference that I took myself for a
pocket-book.

CAPTAIN. Ha-ha! So you know the flavour of the brand! Oh, the
ladies! Ha-ha! And you had one of the proper kind!

CURT. [_Patiently_] Let that be buried now.

CAPTAIN. She was a jewel! Then I have after all--in spite of
everything--one that's pretty decent. For she is straight, in
spite of everything.

CURT. [_Smiling good-humouredly_] In spite of everything.

CAPTAIN. Don't you laugh!

CURT. [_As before_] In spite of everything!

CAPTAIN. Yes, she has been a faithful mate, a splendid
mother--excellent--but [_with a glance at the door on the
right_] she has a devilish temper. Do you know, there have been
moments when I cursed you for saddling me with her.

CURT. [_Good-naturedly_] But I didn't. Listen, man----

CAPTAIN. Yah, yah, yah! You talk nonsense and forget things that
are not pleasant to remember. Don't take it badly, please--I am
accustomed to command and raise Cain, you see, but you know me,
and don't get angry!

CURT. Not at all. But I have not provided you with a wife--on
the contrary.

CAPTAIN. [_Without letting his flow of words be checked_] Don't
you think life is queer anyhow?

CURT. I suppose so.

CAPTAIN. And to grow old--it is no fun, but it is interesting.
Well, my age is nothing to speak of, but it does begin to make
itself felt. All your friends die off, and then you become so
lonely.

CURT. Lucky the man who can grow old in company with a wife.

CAPTAIN. Lucky? Well, it is luck, for the children go their way,
too. You ought not to have left yours.

CURT. Well, I didn't. They were taken away from me----

CAPTAIN. Don't get mad now, because I tell you----

CURT. But it was not so.

CAPTAIN. Well, whichever way it was, it has now become
forgotten--but you are alone!

CURT. You get accustomed to everything.

CAPTAIN. Do you--is it possible to get accustomed--to being
quite alone also?

CURT. Here am I!

CAPTAIN. What have you been doing these fifteen years?

CURT. What a question! These fifteen years!

CAPTAIN. They say you have got hold of money and grown rich.

CURT. I can hardly be called rich----

CAPTAIN. I am not going to ask for a loan.

CURT. If you were, you would find me ready.

CAPTAIN. Many thanks, but I have my bank account. You see [_with
a glance toward the door on the right_], nothing must be lacking
in this house; and the day I had no more money--she would leave
me!

CURT. Oh, no!

CAPTAIN. No? Well, I know better. Think of it, she makes a point
of asking me when I happen to be short, just for the pleasure of
showing me that I am not supporting my family.

CURT. But I heard you say that you have a large income.

CAPTAIN. Of course, I have a large income--but it is not enough.

CURT. Then it is not large, as such things are reckoned----

CAPTAIN. Life is queer, and we as well!

      _The telegraph receiver begins to click_.

CURT. What is that?

CAPTAIN. Nothing but a time correction.

CURT. Have you no telephone?

CAPTAIN. Yes, in the kitchen. But we use the telegraph because
the girls at the central report everything we say.

CURT. Social conditions out here by the sea must be frightful!

CAPTAIN. They are simply horrible! But all life is horrible. And
you, who believe in a sequel, do you think there will be any
peace further on?

CURT. I presume there will be storms and battles there also.

CAPTAIN. There also--if there be any "there"! I prefer
annihilation!

CURT. Are you sure that annihilation will come without pain?

CAPTAIN. I am going to die all of a sudden, without pain

CURT. So you know that?

CAPTAIN. Yes, I know it.

CURT. You don't appear satisfied with your life?

CAPTAIN. [_Sighing_] Satisfied? The day I could die, I should be
satisfied.

CURT. [_Rising_] That you don't know! But tell me: what is going
on in this house? What is happening here? There is a smell as of
poisonous wall-paper, and one feels sick the moment one enters.
I should prefer to get away from here, had I not promised Alice
to stay. There are dead bodies beneath the flooring, and the
place is so filled with hatred that one can hardly breathe.
[_The_ CAPTAIN _sinks together and sits staring into vacancy_]
What is the matter with you? Edgar! [_The_ CAPTAIN _does not
move. Slaps the_ CAPTAIN _on the shoulder_] Edgar!

CAPTAIN. [_Recovering consciousness_] Did you say anything?
[_Looks around_] I thought it was--Alice!--Oh, is that
you?--Say--[_Relapses into apathy_.

CURT. This is horrible! [_Goes over to the door on the right and
opens it_] Alice!

ALICE. [_Enters, wearing a kitchen apron_] What is it?

CURT. I don't know. Look at him.

ALICE. [_Calmly_] He goes off like that at times--I'll play and
then he will wake up.

CURT. No, don't! Not that way! Leave it to me--Does he hear? Or
see?

ALICE. Just now he neither hears nor sees.

CURT. And you can speak of that with such calm? Alice, what is
going on in this house?

ALICE. Ask him there.

CURT. Him there? But he is your husband!

ALICE. A stranger to me--as strange as he was twenty-five years
ago. I know nothing at all about that man--nothing but----

CURT. Stop! He may overhear you.

ALICE. Now he cannot hear anything.

      _A trumpet signal is sounded outside_.

CAPTAIN. [_Leaps to his feet and grabs sabre and cap_] Pardon
me. I have to inspect the sentries.

      [_Goes out through the door in the background_.

CURT. Is he ill?

ALICE. I don't know.

CURT. Has he lost his reason?

ALICE. I don't know.

CURT. Does he drink?

ALICE. He boasts more of it than he really drinks.

CURT. Sit down and talk--but calmly and truthfully.

ALICE. [_Sitting down_] What am I to talk about? That I have
spent a lifetime in this tower, locked up, guarded by a man whom
I have always hated, and whom I now hate so beyond all bounds
that the day he died I should be laughing until the air shook.

CURT. Why have you not parted?

ALICE. You may well ask! While still engaged we parted twice;
since then we have been trying to part every single day--but
we are chained together and cannot break away. Once we were
separated--within the same house--for five whole years. Now
nothing but death can part us. This we know, and for that reason
we are waiting for him as for a liberator.

CURT. Why are you so lonely?

ALICE. Because he isolates me. First he "exterminated" all my
brothers and sisters from our home--he speaks of it himself as
"extermination"--and then my girl friends and everybody else.

CURT. But _his_ relatives? He has not "exterminated" them?

ALICE. Yes, for they came near taking my life, after having
taken my honour and good name. Finally I became forced to keep
up my connection with the world and with other human beings by
means of that telegraph--for the telephone was watched by the
operators. I have taught myself telegraphy, and he doesn't know
it. You must not tell him, for then he would kill me.

CURT. Frightful! Frightful!--But why does he hold me responsible
for your marriage? Let me tell you now how it was. Edgar
was my childhood friend. When he saw you he fell in love at
once. He came to me and asked me to plead his cause. I said
no at once--and, my dear Alice, I knew your tyrannical and
cruel temperament. For that reason I warned him--and when he
persisted, I sent him to get your brother for his spokesman.

ALICE. I believe what you say. But he has been deceiving himself
all these years, so that now you can never get him to believe
anything else.

CURT. Well, let him put the blame on me if that can relieve his
sufferings.

ALICE. But that is too much----

CURT. I am used to it. But what does hurt me is his unjust
charge that I have deserted my children----

ALICE. That's the manner of man he is. He says what suits
him, and then he believes it. But he seems to be fond of you,
principally because you don't contradict him. Try not to grow
tired of us now. I believe you have come in what was to us a
fortunate moment; I think it was even providential--Curt, you
must not grow tired of us, for we are undoubtedly the most
unhappy creatures in the whole world!

      [_She weeps_.

CURT. I have seen _one_ marriage at close quarters, and it was
dreadful--but this is almost worse!

ALICE. Do you think so?

CURT. Yes.

ALICE. Whose fault is it?

CURT. The moment you quit asking whose fault it is, Alice, you
will feel a relief. Try to regard it as a fact, a trial that has
to be borne----

ALICE. I cannot do it! It is too much! [Rising] It is beyond
help!

CURT. I pity both of you!--Do you know why you are hating each
other?

ALICE. No, it is the most unreasoning hatred, without cause,
without purpose, but also without end. And can you imagine why
he is principally afraid of death? He fears that I may marry
again.

CURT. Then he loves you.

ALICE. Probably. But that does not prevent him from hating me.

CURT. [_As if to himself_] It is called love-hatred, and it
hails from the pit!--Does he like you to play for him?

ALICE. Yes, but only horrid melodies--for instance, that awful
"The Entry of the Boyars." When he hears it he loses his head
and wants to dance.

CURT. Does he dance?

ALICE. Oh, he is very funny at times.

CURT. One thing--pardon me for asking. Where are the children?

ALICE. Perhaps you don't know that two of them are dead?

CURT. So you have had that to face also?

ALICE. What is there I have not faced?

CURT. But the other two?

ALICE. In the city. They couldn't stay at home. For he set them
against me.

CURT. And you set them against him?

ALICE. Of course. And then parties were formed, votes bought,
bribes given--and in order not to spoil the children completely
we had to part from them. What should have been the uniting link
became the seed of dissension; what is held the blessing of the
home turned into a curse--well, I believe sometimes that we
belong to a cursed race!

CURT. Yes, is it not so--ever since the Fall?

ALICE. [_With a venomous glance and sharp voice_] What fall?

CURT. That of our first parents.

ALICE. Oh, I thought you meant something else!

      [_Embarrassed silence_.

ALICE. [_With folded hands_] Curt, my kinsman, my childhood
friend--I have not always acted toward you as I should. But now
I am being punished, and you are having your revenge.

CURT. No revenge! Nothing of that kind here! Hush!

ALICE. Do you recall one Sunday while you were engaged--and I
had invited you for dinner----

CURT. Never mind!

ALICE. I must speak! Have pity on me! When you came to dinner,
we had gone away, and you had to leave again.

CURT. You had received an invitation yourselves--what is that to
speak of!

ALICE. Curt, when to-day, a little while ago, I asked you to
stay for supper, I thought we had something left in the pantry.
[_Hiding her face in her hands_] And there is not a thing, not
even a piece of bread----

CURT. _Weeping_] Alice--poor Alice!

ALICE. But when he comes home and wants something to eat, and
there is nothing--then he gets angry. You have never seen him
angry! O, God, what humiliation!

CURT. Will you not let me go out and arrange for something?

ALICE. There is nothing to be had on this island.

CURT. Not for my sake, but for his and yours--let me think
up something--something. We must make the whole thing seem
laughable when he comes. I'll propose that we have a drink, and
in the meantime I'll think of something. Put him in good humour;
play for him, any old nonsense. Sit down at the piano and make
yourself ready----

ALICE. Look at my hands--are they fit to play with? I have to
wipe glasses and polish brass, sweep floors, and make fires----

CURT. But you have two servants?

ALICE. So we have to pretend because he is an officer--but the
servants are leaving us all the time, so that often we have
none at all--most of the time, in fact. How am I to get out of
this--this about supper? Oh, if only fire would break out in
this house!

CURT. Don't, Alice, don't!

ALICE. If the sea would rise and take us away!

CURT. No, no, no, I cannot listen to you!

ALICE. What will he say, what will he say--Don't go, Curt, don't
go away from me!

CURT. No, dear Alice--I shall not go.

ALICE. Yes, but when you are gone----

CURT. Has he ever laid hands on you?

ALICE. On me? Oh, no, for he knew that then I should have left
him. One has to preserve some pride.

      _From without is heard_: "_Who goes
      there_?--_Friend_."

CURT. [_Rising_] Is he coming?

ALICE. [_Frightened_] Yes, that's he. [_Pause_.

CURT. What in the world are we to do?

ALICE. I don't know, I don't know!

CAPTAIN. [_Enters from the background_, _cheerful_] There!
Leisure now! Well, has she had time to make her complaints? Is
she not unhappy--hey?

CURT. How's the weather outside?--

CAPTAIN. Half storm--[_Facetiously; opening one of the doors
ajar_] Sir Bluebeard with the maiden in the tower; and outside
stands the sentry with drawn sabre to guard the pretty
maiden--and then come the brothers, but the sentry is there.
Look at him. Hip--hip! That's a fine sentry. Look at him.
_Malbrough s'en va-t-en guerre_! Let us dance the sword dance!
Curt ought to see it!

CURT. No, let us have "The Entry of the Boyars" instead!

CAPTAIN. Oh, you know that one, do you?--Alice in the kitchen
apron, come and play. Come, I tell you!

      [ALICE _goes reluctantly to the piano_.

CAPTAIN. [_Pinching her arm_] Now you have been black-guarding
me!

ALICE. I?

      CURT _turns away from them_.

      ALICE _plays_ "_The Entry of the Boyars_."

      _The_ CAPTAIN _performs some kind of Hungarian dance
      step behind the writing-table so that his spurs are
      set jingling. Then he sinks down on the floor without
      being noticed by_ CURT _and_ ALICE, _and the latter
      goes on playing the piece to the end_.

ALICE. [_Without turning around_] Shall we have it again?
[_Silence. Turns around and becomes aware of the_ CAPTAIN, _who
is lying unconscious on the floor in such a way that he is
hidden from the public by the writing-table_] Lord Jesus!

      _She stands still, with arms crossed over her breast,
      and gives vent to a sigh as of gratitude and relief_.

CURT. [_Turns around; hurries over to the_ CAPTAIN] What is it?
What is it?

ALICE. [_In a high state of tension_] Is he dead?

CURT. I don't know. Come and help me.

ALICE. [_Remains still_] I cannot touch him--is he dead?

CURT. No--he lives.

      ALICE _sighs_.

      CURT _helps the_ CAPTAIN _to his feet and places him
      in a chair_.

CAPTAIN. What was it? [_Silence_] What was it?

CURT. You fell down.

CAPTAIN. Did anything happen?

CURT. You fell on the floor. What is the matter with you?

CAPTAIN. With me? Nothing at all. I don't know of anything. What
are you staring at me for?

CURT. You are ill.

CAPTAIN. What nonsense is that? You go on playing, Alice--Oh,
now it's back again!

      [_Puts both hands up to his head._

ALICE. Can't you see that you are ill?

CAPTAIN. Don't shriek! It is only a fainting spell.

CURT. We must call a doctor--I'll use your telephone----

CAPTAIN. I don't want any doctor.

CURT. You must! We have to call him for our own sake--otherwise
we shall be held responsible----

CAPTAIN. I'll show him the door if he comes here. I'll shoot
him. Oh, now it's there again!

      [_Takes hold of his head._

CURT. [_Goes toward the door on the right_] Now I am going to
telephone! [_Goes out_.

      [ALICE _takes off her apron._

CAPTAIN. Will you give me a glass of water?

ALICE. I suppose I have to! [_Gives him a glass of water._

CAPTAIN. How amiable!

ALICE. Are you ill?

CAPTAIN. Please pardon me for not being well.

ALICE. Will you take care of yourself then?

CAPTAIN. _You_ won't do it, I suppose?

ALICE. No, of that you may be sure!

CAPTAIN. The hour is come for which you have been waiting so
long.

ALICE. The hour you believed would never come.

CAPTAIN. Don't be angry with me!

CURT. [_Enters from the right_] Oh, it's too bad----

ALICE. What did he say?

CURT. He rang off without a word.

ALICE. [_To the_ Captain] There is the result of your limitless
arrogance!

CAPTAIN. I think I am growing worse--Try to get a doctor from
the city.

ALICE. [_Goes to the telegraph instrument_] We shall have to use
the telegraph then.

CAPTAIN. [_Rising half-way from the chair; startled_] Do
you--know--how to use it?

ALICE. [_Working the key_] Yes, I do.

CAPTAIN. So-o! Well, go on then--But isn't she treacherous!
[_To_ CURT] Come over here and sit by me. [CURT _sits down
beside the_ CAPTAIN] Take my hand. I sit here and fall--can you
make it out? Down something--such a queer feeling.

CURT. Have you had any attack like this before?

CAPTAIN. Never----

CURT. While you are waiting for an answer from the city, I'll go
over to the doctor and have a talk with him. Has he attended you
before?

CAPTAIN. He has.

CURT. Then he knows your case. [Goes _toward the left_.

ALICE. There will be an answer shortly. It is very kind of you,
Curt. But come back soon.

CURT. As soon as I can. [_Goes out_.

CAPTAIN. Curt _is_ kind! And how he has changed.

ALICE. Yes, and for the better. It is too bad, however, that he
must be dragged into our misery just now.

CAPTAIN. But good for us--I wonder just how he stands. Did you
notice that he wouldn't speak of his own affairs?

ALICE. I did notice it, but then I don't think anybody asked him.

CAPTAIN. Think, what a life! And ours! I wonder if it is the
same for all people?

ALICE. Perhaps, although they don't speak of it as we do.

CAPTAIN. At times I have thought that misery draws misery, and
that those who are happy shun the unhappy. That is the reason
why we see nothing but misery.

ALICE. Have you known anybody who was happy?

CAPTAIN. Let me see! No--Yes--the Ekmarks.

ALICE. You don't mean it! She had to have an operation last
year----

CAPTAIN. That's right. Well, then I don't know--yes, the Von
Kraffts.

ALICE. Yes, the whole family lived an idyllic life, well off,
respected by everybody, nice children, good marriages--right
along until they were fifty. Then that cousin of theirs
committed a crime that led to a prison term and all sorts
of after-effects. And that was the end of their peace. The
family name was dragged in the mud by all the newspapers. The
Krafft murder case made it impossible for the family to appear
anywhere, after having been so much thought of. The children had
to be taken out of school. Oh, heavens!

CAPTAIN. I wonder what my trouble is?

ALICE. What do you think?

CAPTAIN. Heart or head. It is as if the soul wanted to fly off
and turn into smoke.

ALICE. Have you any appetite?

CAPTAIN. Yes, how about the supper?

ALICE. [_Crosses the stage, disturbed_] I'll ask Jenny.

CAPTAIN. Why, she's gone!

ALICE. Yes, yes, yes!

CAPTAIN. Ring for Christine so that I can get some fresh water.

ALICE. [_Rings_] I wonder--[_Rings again_] She doesn't hear.

CAPTAIN. Go and look--just think, if she should have left also!

ALICE. [_Goes over to the door on the left and opens it_] What
is this? Her trunk is in the hallway--packed.

CAPTAIN. Then she has gone.

ALICE. This is hell!

      _Begins to cry, falls on her knees, and puts her head
      on a chair, sobbing_.

CAPTAIN. And everything at once! And then Curt had to turn up
just in time to get a look into this mess of ours! If there be
any further humiliation in store, let it come this moment!

ALICE. Do you know what I suspect? Curt went away and will not
come back.

CAPTAIN. I believe it of him.

ALICE. Yes, we are cursed----

CAPTAIN. What are you talking of?

ALICE. Don't you see how everybody shuns us?

CAPTAIN. I don't mind! [_The telegraph receiver clicks_] There
is the answer. Hush, I can hear it--Nobody can spare the time.
Evasions! The rabble!

ALICE. That's what you get because you have despised your
physicians--and failed to pay them.

CAPTAIN. That is not so!

ALICE. Even when you could, you didn't care to pay their bills
because you looked down upon their work, just as you have looked
down upon mine and everybody else's. They don't want to come.
And the telephone is cut off because you didn't think that
good for anything either. Nothing is good for anything but your
rifles and guns!

CAPTAIN. Don't stand there and talk nonsense----

ALICE. Everything comes back.

CAPTAIN. What sort of superstition is that? Talk for old women!

ALICE. You will see! Do you know that we owe Christine six
months' wages?

CAPTAIN. Well, she has stolen that much.

ALICE. But I have also had to borrow money from her.

CAPTAIN. I think you capable of it.

ALICE. What an ingrate you are! You know I borrowed that money
for the children to get into the city.

CAPTAIN. Curt had a fine way of coming back! A rascal, that one,
too! And a coward! He didn't dare to say he had had enough, and
that he found the doctor's party more pleasant--He's the same
rapscallion as ever!

CURT. [_Enters quickly from the left_] Well, my dear Edgar, this
is how the matter stands--the doctor knows everything about your
heart----

CAPTAIN. My heart?

CURT. You have long been suffering from calcification of the
heart----

CAPTAIN. Stone heart?

CURT. And----

CAPTAIN. Is it serious?

CURT. Well, that is to say----

CAPTAIN. It is serious.

CURT. Yes.

CAPTAIN. Fatal?

CURT. You must be very careful. First of all: the cigar must
go. [_The_ CAPTAIN _throws away his cigar_] And next: no more
whiskey! Then, to bed!

CAPTAIN. [_Scared_] No, I don't want _that_! Not to bed! That's
the end! Then you never get up again. I shall sleep on the couch
to-night. What more did he say?

CURT. He was very nice about it and will come at once if you
call him.

CAPTAIN. Was he nice, the hypocrite? I don't want to see him! I
can at least eat?

CURT. Not to-night. And during the next few days nothing but
milk.

CAPTAIN. Milk! I cannot take that stuff into my mouth.

CURT. Better learn how!

CAPTAIN. I am too old to learn. [_Puts his hand up to his head_]
Oh, there it is again now!

      [_He sits perfectly still, staring straight ahead_.

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] What did the doctor tell you?

CURT. That he _may_ die.

ALICE. Thank God!

CURT. Take care, Alice, take care! And now, go and get a pillow
and a blanket and I'll put him here on the couch. Then I'll sit
on the chair here all night.

ALICE. And I?

CURT. You go to bed. Your presence seems only to make him worse.

ALICE. Command! I shall obey, for you seem to mean well toward
both of us. [_Goes out to the left_.

CURT. Mark you--toward both of you! And I shall not mix in any
partisan squabbles.

      CURT _takes the water bottle and goes out to the
      right. The noise of the wind outside is clearly
      heard. Then one of the doors is blown open and an old
      woman of shabby, unprepossessing appearance peeps
      into the room_.

CAPTAIN. [_Wakes up, rises, and looks around_] So, they have
left me, the rascals! [_Catches sight of the old woman and is
frightened by her_] Who is it? What do you want?

OLD WOMAN. I just wanted to close the door, sir.

CAPTAIN. Why should you? Why should you?

OLD WOMAN. Because it blew open just as I passed by.

CAPTAIN. Wanted to steal, did you?

OLD WOMAN. Not much here to take away, Christine said.

CAPTAIN. Christine?

OLD WOMAN. Good night, sir, and sleep well!

      [_Closes the door and disappears._

      ALICE _comes in from the left with pillows and a
      blanket._

CAPTAIN. Who was that at the door? Anybody?

ALICE. Why, it was old Mary from the poorhouse who just went by.

CAPTAIN. Are you sure?

ALICE. Are you afraid?

CAPTAIN. I, afraid? Oh, no!

ALICE. As you don't want to go to bed, you can lie here.

CAPTAIN. [_Goes over to the couch and lies down_] I'll lie here.

      [_Tries to take_ ALICE'S _hand, but she pulls it
      away._ CURT _comes in with the water bottle_.

CAPTAIN. Curt, don't go away from me!

CURT. I am going to stay up with you all night. Alice is going
to bed.

CAPTAIN. Good night then, Alice.

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] Good night, Curt.

CURT. Good night.

      [ALICE _goes out_.

CURT. [_Takes a chair and sits down beside the couch_] Don't you
want to take off your boots?

CAPTAIN. No, a warrior should always be armed.

CURT. Are you expecting a battle then?

CAPTAIN. Perhaps! [_Rising up in bed_] Curt, you are the only
human being to whom I ever disclosed anything of myself. Listen
to me!--If I die to-night--look after my children!

CURT. I will do so.

CAPTAIN. Thank you--I trust in you!

CURT. Can you explain why you trust me?

CAPTAIN. We have not been friends, for friendship is something
I don't believe in, and our families were born enemies and have
always been at war----

CURT. And yet you trust me?

CAPTAIN. Yes, and I don't know why. [_Silence_] Do you think I
am going to die?

CURT. You as well as everybody. There will be no exception made
in your case.

CAPTAIN. Are you bitter?

CURT. Yes--are you afraid of death? Of the wheelbarrow and the
garden bed?

CAPTAIN. Think, if it were not the end!

CURT. That's what a great many think!

CAPTAIN. And then?

CURT. Nothing but surprises, I suppose.

CAPTAIN. But nothing at all is known with certainty?

CURT. No, that's just it! That is why you must be prepared for
everything.

CAPTAIN. You are not childish enough to believe in a hell?

CURT. Do you not believe in it--you, who are right in it?

CAPTAIN. That is metaphorical only.

CURT. The realism with which you have described yours seems to
preclude all thought of metaphors, poetical or otherwise.

      [_Silence_.

CAPTAIN. If you only knew what pangs I suffer!

CURT. Of the body?

CAPTAIN. No, not of the body.

CURT. Then it must be of the spirit, for no other alternative
exists. [_Pause._

CAPTAIN. [_Rising up in bed_] I don't want to die!

CURT. Not long ago you wished for annihilation.

CAPTAIN. Yes, if it be painless.

CURT. Apparently it is not!

CAPTAIN. Is this annihilation then?

CURT. The beginning of it.

CAPTAIN. Good night.

CURT. Good night.

_Curtain_.



      _The same setting, but note the lamp is at the point
      of going out. Through the windows and the glass panes
      of the doors a gray morning is visible. The sea is
      stirring. The sentry is on the battery as before_.

      _The_ CAPTAIN _is lying on the couch, asleep_. CURT
      _sits on a chair beside him, looking pale and wearied
      from his watch_.


ALICE. [_In from the left_] Is he asleep?

CURT. Yes, since the time when the sun should have risen.

ALICE. What kind of night did he have?

CURT. He slept now and then, but he talked a good deal.

ALICE. Of what?

CURT. He argued about religion like a schoolboy, but with a
pretension of having solved all the world riddles. Finally,
toward morning, he invented the immortality of the soul.

ALICE. For his own glory.

CURT. Exactly! He is actually the most conceited person I have
ever met. "I am; consequently God must be."

ALICE. You have become aware of it? Look at those boots. With
those he would have trampled the earth flat, had he been allowed
to do so. With those he has trampled down other people's fields
and gardens. With those he has trampled on some people's toes
and other people's heads--Man-eater, you have got your bullet at
last!

CURT. He would be comical were he not so tragical; and there are
traces of greatness in all his narrow-mindedness--Have you not a
single good word to say about him?

ALICE. [_Sitting down_] Yes, if he only does not hear it; for if
he hears a single word of praise he develops megalomania on the
spot.

CURT. He can hear nothing now, for he has had a dose of morphine.

ALICE. Born in a poor home, with many brothers and sisters,
Edgar very early had to support the family by giving lessons,
as the father was a ne'er-do-well if nothing worse. It must be
hard for a young man to give up all the pleasures of youth in
order to slave for a bunch of thankless children whom he has not
brought into the world. I was a little girl when I saw him, as
a young man, going without an overcoat in the winter while the
mercury stood at fifteen below zero--his little sisters wore
kersey coats--it was fine, and I admired him, but his ugliness
repelled me. Is he not unusually ugly?

CURT. Yes, and his ugliness has a touch of the monstrous at
times. Whenever we fell out, I noticed it particularly. And
when, at such times, he went away, his image assumed enormous
forms and proportions, and he literally haunted me.

ALICE. Think of me then! However, his earlier years as an
officer were undoubtedly a martyrdom. But now and then he was
helped by rich people. This he will never admit, and whatever
has come to him in that way he has accepted as a due tribute,
without giving thanks for it.

CURT. We were to speak well of him.

ALICE. Yes--after he is dead. But then I recall nothing more.

CURT. Have you found him cruel?

ALICE. Yes--and yet he can show himself both kind and
susceptible to sentiment. As an enemy he is simply horrible.

CURT. Why did he not get the rank of major?

ALICE. Oh, you ought to understand that! They didn't want to
raise a man above themselves who had already proved himself a
tyrant as an inferior. But you must never let on that you know
this. He says himself that he did not want promotion--Did he
speak of the children?

CURT. Yes, he was longing for Judith.

ALICE. I thought so--Oh! Do you know what Judith is? His own
image, whom he has trained for use against me. Think only, that
my own daughter--has raised her hand against me!

CURT. That is too much!

ALICE. Hush! He is moving--Think if he overheard us! He is full
of trickery also.

CURT. He is actually waking up.

ALICE. Does he not look like an ogre? I am afraid of him!

      [_Silence_.

CAPTAIN. [_Stirs, wakes up, rises in bed, and looks around_] It
is morning--at last!

CURT. How are you feeling?

CAPTAIN. Not so very bad.

CURT. Do you want a doctor?

CAPTAIN. No--I want to see Judith--my child!

CURT. Would it not be wise to set your house in order before--or
if something should happen?

CAPTAIN. What do you mean? What could happen?

CURT. What may happen to all of us.

CAPTAIN. Oh, nonsense! Don't you believe that I die so easily!
And don't rejoice prematurely, Alice!

CURT. Think of your children. Make your will so that your wife
at least may keep the household goods.

CAPTAIN. Is she going to inherit from me while I am still alive?

CURT. No, but if something happens she ought not to be turned
into the street. One who has dusted and polished and looked
after these things for twenty-five years should have some
right to remain in possession of them. May I send word to the
regimental lawyer?

CAPTAIN. No!

CURT. You are a cruel man--more cruel than I thought you!

CAPTAIN. Now it is back again!

      [_Falls back on the bed unconscious_.

ALICE. [_Goes toward the right_] There are some people in the
kitchen--I have to go down there.

CURT. Yes, go. Here is not much to be done.

      [ALICE _goes out_.

CAPTAIN. [_Recovers_] Well, Curt, what are you going to do about
your quarantine?

CURT. Oh, that will be all right.

CAPTAIN. No; I am in command on this island, so you will have to
deal with me--don't forget that!

CURT. Have you ever seen a quarantine station?

CAPTAIN. Have I? Before you were born. And I'll give you a piece
of advice: don't place your disinfection plant too close to the
shore.

CURT. I was thinking that the nearer I could get to the water
the better----

CAPTAIN. That shows how much you know of your business. Water,
don't you see, is the element of the bacilli, their life element?

CURT. But the salt water of the sea is needed to wash away all
the impurity.

CAPTAIN. Idiot! Well, now, when you get a house for yourself I
suppose you'll bring home your children?

CURT. Do you think they will let themselves be brought?

CAPTAIN. Of course, if you have got any backbone! It would make
a good impression on the people if you fulfilled your duties in
that respect also----

CURT. I have always fulfilled my duties in that respect.

CAPTAIN. [_Raising his voice_]--in the one respect where you
have proved yourself most remiss----

CURT. Have I not told you----

CAPTAIN. [_Paying no attention_]--for one does not desert one's
children like that----

CURT. Go right on!

CAPTAIN. As your relative--a relative older than yourself--I
feel entitled to tell you the truth, even if it should prove
bitter--and you should not take it badly----

CURT. Are you hungry?

CAPTAIN. Yes, I am.

CURT. Do you want something light?

CAPTAIN. No, something solid.

CURT. Then you would be done for.

CAPTAIN. Is it not enough to be sick, but one must starve also?

CURT. That's how the land lies.

CAPTAIN. And neither drink nor smoke? Then life is not worth
much!

CURT. Death demands sacrifices, or it comes at once.

ALICE. [_Enters with several bunches of flowers and some
telegrams and letters_] These are for you.

      [_Throws the flowers on the writing-table_.

CAPTAIN. [_Flattered_] For me! Will you please let me look?

ALICE. Oh, they are only from the non-commissioned officers, the
bandmen, and the gunners.

CAPTAIN. You are jealous.

ALICE. Oh, no. If it were laurel wreaths, that would be another
matter--but those you can never get.

CAPTAIN. Hm!--Here's a telegram from the Colonel--read it, Curt.
The Colonel is a gentleman after all--though he is something of
an idiot. And this is from--what does it say? It is from Judith!
Please telegraph her to come with the next boat. And here--yes,
one is not quite without friends after all, and it is fine to
see them take thought of a sick man, who is also a man of
deserts above his rank, and a man free of fear or blemish.

ALICE. I don't quite understand--are they congratulating you
because you are sick?

CAPTAIN. Hyena!

ALICE. Yes, we had a doctor here on the island who was so hated
that when he left they gave a banquet--after him, and not for
him!

CAPTAIN. Put the flowers in water--I am not easily caught, and
all people are a lot of rabble, but, by heavens, these simple
tributes are genuine--they cannot be anything but genuine!

ALICE. Fool!

CURT. [_Reading the telegram_] Judith says she cannot come
because the steamer is held back by the storm.

CAPTAIN. Is that all?

CURT. No-o--there is a postscript.

CAPTAIN. Out with it!

CURT. Well, she asks her father not to drink so much.

CAPTAIN. Impudence! That's like children! That's my only beloved
daughter--my Judith--my idol!

ALICE. And your image!

CAPTAIN. Such is life. Such are its best joys--Hell!

ALICE. Now you get the harvest of your sowing. You have set her
against her own mother and now she turns against the father.
Tell me, then, that there is no God!

CAPTAIN. [_To_ CURT] What does the Colonel say?

CURT. He grants leave of absence without any comment.

CAPTAIN. Leave of absence? I have not asked for it.

ALICE. No, but I have asked for it.

CAPTAIN. I don't accept it.

ALICE. Order has already been issued.

CAPTAIN. That's none of my concern!

ALICE. Do you see, Curt, that for this man exist no laws,
no constitutions, no prescribed human order? He stands above
everything and everybody. The universe is created for his
private use. The sun and the moon pursue their courses in order
to spread his glory among the stars. Such is this man: this
insignificant captain, who could not even reach the rank of
major, and at whose strutting everybody laughs, while he thinks
himself feared; this poor wretch who is afraid in the dark and
believes in barometers: and all this in conjunction with and
having for its climax--a barrowful of manure that is not even
prime quality!

CAPTAIN. [_Fanning himself with a bunch of flowers, conceitedly,
without listening to_ ALICE] Have you asked Curt to breakfast?

ALICE. No.

CAPTAIN. Get us, then, at once two nice tenderloin steaks.

ALICE. Two?

CAPTAIN. I am going to have one myself.

ALICE. But we are three here.

CAPTAIN. Oh, you want one also? Well, make it three then.

ALICE. Where am I to get them? Last night you asked Curt to
supper, and there was not a crust of bread in the house. Curt
has been awake all night without anything to eat, and he has had
no coffee because there is none in the house and the credit is
gone.

CAPTAIN. She is angry at me for not dying yesterday.

ALICE. No, for not dying twenty-five years ago--for not dying
before you were born!

CAPTAIN. [_To_ CURT] Listen to her! That's what happens when you
institute a marriage, my dear Curt. And it is perfectly clear
that it was not instituted in heaven.

      [ALICE _and_ CURT _look at each other meaningly_.

CAPTAIN. [_Rises and goes toward the door_] However, say what
you will, now I am going on duty. [_Puts on an old-fashioned
helmet with a brush crest, girds on the sabre, and shoulders his
cloak_] If anybody calls for me, I am at the battery. [ALICE
_and_ CURT _try vainly to hold him back_] Stand aside!

      [_Goes out_.

ALICE. Yes, go! You always go, always show your back, whenever
the fight becomes too much for you. And then you let your wife
cover the retreat--you hero of the bottle, you arch-braggart,
you arch-liar! Fie on you!

CURT. This is bottomless!

ALICE. And you don't know everything yet.

CURT. Is there anything more----

ALICE. But I am ashamed----

CURT. Where is he going now? And where does he get the strength?

ALICE. Yes, you may well ask! Now he goes down to the
non-commissioned officers and thanks them for the flowers--and
then he eats and drinks with them. And then he speaks ill of all
the other officers--If you only knew how many times he has been
threatened with discharge! Nothing but sympathy for his family
has saved him. And this he takes for fear of his superiority.
And he hates and maligns the very women--wives of other
officers--who have been pleading our cause.

CURT. I have to confess that I applied for this position in
order to find peace by the sea--and of your circumstances I knew
nothing at all.

ALICE. Poor Curt! And how will you get something to eat?

CURT. Oh, I can go over to the doctor's--but you? Will you not
permit me to arrange this for you?

ALICE. If only he does not learn of it, for then he would kill
me.

CURT. [_Looking out through the window_] Look, he stands right
in the wind out there on the rampart.

ALICE. He is to be pitied--for being what he is!

CURT. Both of you are to be pitied! But what can be done?

ALICE. I don't know--The mail brought a batch of unpaid bills
also, and those he did not see.

CURT. It may be fortunate to escape seeing things at times.

ALICE. [_At the window_] He has unbuttoned his cloak and lets
the wind strike his chest. Now he wants to die!

CURT. That is not what he wants, I think, for a while ago, when
he felt his life slipping away, he grabbed hold of mine and
began to stir in my affairs as if he wanted to crawl into me and
live my life.

ALICE. That is just his vampire nature--to interfere with other
people's destinies, to suck interest out of other existences,
to regulate and arrange the doings of others, since he can
find no interest whatever in his own life. And remember, Curt,
don't ever admit him into your family life, don't ever make him
acquainted with your friends, for he will take them away from
you and make them his own. He is a perfect magician in this
respect. Were he to meet your children, you would soon find them
intimate with _him_, and he would be advising them and educating
them to suit himself--but principally in opposition to _your_
wishes.

CURT. Alice, was it not he who took my children away from me at
the time of the divorce?

ALICE. Since it is all over now--yes, it was he.

CURT. I have suspected it, but never had any certainty. It was
he!

ALICE. When you placed your full trust in my husband and sent
him to make peace between yourself and your wife, he made love
to her instead, and taught her the trick that gave her the
children.

CURT. Oh, God! God in heaven!

ALICE. There you have another side of him. [_Silence_.

CURT. Do you know, last night--when he thought himself
dying--then--he made me promise that I should look after his
children!

ALICE. But you don't want to revenge yourself on my children?

CURT. Yes--by keeping my promise. I shall look after your
children.

ALICE. You could take no worse revenge, for there is nothing he
hates so much as generosity.

CURT. Then I may consider myself revenged--without any revenge.

ALICE. I love revenge as a form of justice, and I am yearning to
see evil get its punishment.

CURT. You still remain at that point?

ALICE. There I shall always remain, and the day I forgave or
loved an enemy I should be a hypocrite.

CURT. It may be a duty not to say everything, Alice, not to see
everything. It is called forbearance, and all of us need it.

ALICE. Not I! My life lies clear and open, and I have always
played my cards straight.

CURT. That is saying a good deal.

ALICE. No, it is not saying enough. Because what I have suffered
innocently for the sake of this man, whom I never loved----

CURT. Why did you marry?

ALICE. Who can tell? Because he took me, seduced me! I don't
know. And then I was longing to get up on the heights----

CURT. And deserted your art?

ALICE. Which was despised! But you know, he cheated me! He held
out hopes of a pleasant life, a handsome home--and there was
nothing but debts; no gold except on the uniform--and even that
was not real gold. He cheated me!

CURT. Wait a moment! When a young man falls in love, he sees
the future in a hopeful light: that his hopes are not always
realized, one must pardon. I have the same kind of deceit on my
own conscience without thinking myself dishonest--What is it
you see on the rampart?

ALICE. I want to see if he has fallen down.

CURT. Has he?

ALICE. No--worse luck! He is cheating me all the time.

CURT. Then I shall call on the doctor and the lawyer.

ALICE. [_Sitting down at the window_] Yes, dear Curt, go. I
shall sit here and wait. And I have learned how to wait!

_Curtain_.



      _Same setting in full daylight. The sentry is pacing
      back and forth on the battery as before_.

      ALICE _sits in the right-hand easy-chair. Her hair is
      now gray_.


CURT. [_Enters from the left after having knocked_] Good day,
Alice.

ALICE. Good day, Curt. Sit down.

CURT. [_Sits down in the left-hand easy-chair_] The steamer is
just coming in.

ALICE. Then I know what's in store, for he is on board.

CURT. Yes, he is, for I caught the glitter of his helmet--What
has he been doing in the city?

ALICE. Oh, I can figure it out. He dressed for parade, which
means that he saw the Colonel, and he put on white gloves, which
means that he made some calls.

CURT. Did you notice his quiet manner yesterday? Since he has
quit drinking and become temperate, he is another man: calm,
reserved, considerate----

ALICE. I know it, and if that man had always kept sober he would
have been a menace to humanity. It is perhaps fortunate for the
rest of mankind that he made himself ridiculous and harmless
through his whiskey.

CURT. The spirit in the bottle has chastised him--But have you
noticed since death put its mark on him that he has developed a
dignity which elevates? And is it not possible that with this
new idea of immortality may have come a new outlook upon life?

ALICE. You are deceiving yourself. He is conjuring up something
evil. And don't you believe what he says, for he lies with
premeditation, and he knows the art of intriguing as no one
else----

CURT. [_Watching_ ALICE] Why, Alice, what does this mean? Your
hair has turned gray in these two nights!

ALICE. No, my friend, it has long been gray, and I have simply
neglected to darken it since my husband is as good as dead.
Twenty-five years in prison--do you know that this place served
as a prison in the old days?

CURT. Prison--well, the walls show it.

ALICE. And my complexion! Even the children took on prison color
in here.

CURT. I find it hard to imagine children prattling within these
walls.

ALICE. There was not much prattling done either. And those two
that died perished merely from lack of light.

CURT. What do you think is coming next?

ALICE. The decisive blow at us two. I caught a familiar glimmer
in his eye when you read out that telegram from Judith. It
ought, of course, to have been directed against her, but she,
you know, is inviolate, and so his hatred sought you.

CURT. What are his intentions in regard to me, do you think?

ALICE. Hard to tell, but he possesses a marvellous skill in
nosing out other people's secrets--and did you notice how, all
day yesterday, he seemed to be living in your quarantine; how
he drank a life-interest out of your existence; how he ate your
children alive? A cannibal, I tell you--for I know him. His own
life is going, or has gone----

CURT. I also have that impression of his being already on the
other side. His face seems to phosphoresce, as if he were in
a state of decay--and his eyes flash like will-o'-the-wisps
over graves or morasses--Here he comes! Tell him you thought it
possible he might be jealous.

ALICE. No, he is too self-conceited. "Show me the man of whom I
need to be jealous!" Those are his own words.

CURT. So much the better, for even his faults carry with them a
certain merit--Shall I get up and meet him anyhow?

ALICE. No, be impolite, or he will think you false. And if he
begins to lie, pretend to believe him. I know perfectly how to
translate his lies, and get always at the truth with the help of
my dictionary. I foresee something dreadful--but, Curt, don't
lose your self-control! My own advantage in our long struggle
has been that I was always sober, and for that reason in full
control of myself. He was always tripped by his whiskey--Now we
shall see!

CAPTAIN. [_In from the left in full uniform, with helmet, cloak,
and white gloves. Calm, dignified, but pale and hollow-eyed.
Moves forward with a tottering step and sinks down, his helmet
and cloak still on, in a chair at the right of the stage, far
from_ CURT _and_ ALICE] Good day. Pardon me for sitting down
like this, but I feel a little tired.

ALICE _and_ CURT. Good day. Welcome home.

ALICE. How are you feeling?

CAPTAIN. Splendid! Only a little tired----

ALICE. What news from the city?

CAPTAIN. Oh, a little of everything. I saw the doctor, among
other things, and he said it was nothing at all--that I might
live twenty years, if I took care of myself.

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] Now he is lying. [_To the_ CAPTAIN] Why,
that's fine, my dear.

CAPTAIN. So much for that.

_Silence, during which the_ CAPTAIN _is looking at_ ALICE _and_
CURT _as if expecting them to speak_.

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] Don't say a word, but let him begin--then he
will show his cards.

CAPTAIN. [_To_ ALICE] Did you say anything?

ALICE. No, not a word.

CAPTAIN. [_Dragging on the words_] Well, Curt!

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] There--now he is coming out.

CAPTAIN. Well, I went to the city, as you know. [CURT _nods
assent_] Mm-mm, I picked up acquaintances--and among others--a
young cadet [_dragging_] in the artillery. [_Pause, during
which_ CURT _shows some agitation_] As--we are in need of cadets
right here, I arranged with the Colonel to let him come here.
This ought to please you, especially when I inform you that--he
is--your own son!

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] The vampire--don't you see?

CURT. Under ordinary circumstances that ought to please a
father, but in my case it will merely be painful.

CAPTAIN. I don't see why it should!

CURT. You don't need to--it is enough that I don't want it.

CAPTAIN. Oh, you think so? Well, then, you ought to know that
the young man has been ordered to report here, and that from now
on he has to obey me.

CURT. Then I shall force him to seek transfer to another
regiment.

CAPTAIN. You cannot do it, as you have no rights over your son.

CURT. No?

CAPTAIN. No, for the court gave those rights to the mother.

CURT. Then I shall communicate with the mother.

CAPTAIN. You don't need to.

CURT. Don't need to?

CAPTAIN. No, for I have already done so. Yah!

      [CURT _rises but sinks back again_.

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] Now he must die!

CURT. Why, he _is_ a cannibal!

CAPTAIN. So much for that! [_Straight to_ ALICE _and_ CURT] Did
you say anything?

ALICE. No--have you grown hard of hearing?

CAPTAIN. Yes, a little--but if you come nearer to me I can tell
you something between ourselves.

ALICE. That is not necessary--and a witness is sometimes good to
have for both parties.

CAPTAIN. You are right; witnesses are sometimes good to have!
But, first of all, did you get that will?

ALICE. [_Hands him a document_] The regimental lawyer drew it up
himself.

CAPTAIN. In your favor--good! [_Reads the document and then
tears it carefully into strips which he throws on the floor_] So
much for that! Yah!

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] Did you ever see such a man?

CURT. That is no man!

CAPTAIN. Well, Alice, this was what I wanted to say----

ALICE. [_Alarmed_] Go on, please.

CAPTAIN. [_Calmly as before_] On account of your long cherished
desire to quit this miserable existence in an unhappy marriage;
on account of the lack of feeling with which you have treated
your husband and children, and on account of the carelessness
you have shown in the handling of our domestic economy, I have,
during this trip to the city, filed an application for divorce
in the City Court.

ALICE. Oh--and your grounds?

CAPTAIN. [_Calmly as before_] Besides the grounds already
mentioned, I have others of a purely personal nature. As it
has been found that I may live another twenty years, I am
contemplating a change from this unhappy marital union to one
that suits me better, and I mean to join my fate to that of some
woman capable of devotion to her husband, and who also may bring
into the home not only youth, but--let us say--a little beauty!

ALICE. [_Takes the wedding-ring from her finger and throws it at
the_ CAPTAIN] You are welcome!

CAPTAIN. [_Picks up the ring and puts it in his rest pocket_]
She throws away the ring. The witness will please take notice.

ALICE. [_Rises in great agitation_] And you intend to turn me
out in order to put another woman into my home?

CAPTAIN. Yah!

ALICE. Well, then, we'll speak plain language! Cousin Curt, that
man is guilty of an attempt to murder his wife.

CURT. An attempt to murder?

ALICE. Yes, he pushed me into the water.

CAPTAIN. Without witnesses!

ALICE. He lies again--Judith saw it!

CAPTAIN. Well, what of it?

ALICE. She can testify to it.

CAPTAIN. No, she cannot, for she says that she didn't see
anything.

ALICE. You have taught the child to lie!

CAPTAIN. I didn't need to, for you had taught her already.

ALICE. You have met Judith?

CAPTAIN. Yah!

ALICE. Oh, God! Oh, God!

CAPTAIN. The fortress has surrendered. The enemy will be
permitted to depart in safety on ten minutes' notice. [_Places
his watch on the table_] Ten minutes--watch on the table! [Stops
_and puts one hand up to his heart_.

ALICE. [_Goes over to the_ CAPTAIN _and takes his arm_] What is
it?

CAPTAIN. I don't know.

ALICE. Do you want anything--a drink?

CAPTAIN. Whiskey? No, I don't want to die--You! [_Straightening
himself up_] Don't touch me! Ten minutes, or the garrison will
be massacred. [_Pulls the sabre partly from the scabbard_] Ten
minutes!

      [_Goes out through the background_.

CURT. What kind of man is this?

ALICE. He is a demon, and no man!

CURT. What does he want with my son?

ALICE. He wants him as hostage in order to be your master--he
wants to isolate you from the authorities of the island--Do you
know that the people around here have named this island "Little
Hell"?

CURT. I didn't know that--Alice, you are the first woman who
ever inspired me with compassion--all others have seemed to me
to deserve their fate.

ALICE. Don't desert me now! Don't leave me, for he will beat
me--he has been doing so all these twenty-five years--in the
presence of the children--and he has pushed me into the water----

CURT. Having heard this, I place myself absolutely against him.
I came here without an angry thought, without memory of his
former slanders and attempts to humiliate me. I forgave him even
when you told me that he was the man who had parted me from my
children--for he was ill and dying--but now, when he wants to
steal my son, he must die--he or I!

ALICE. Good! No surrender of the fortress! But blow it up
instead, with him in it, even if we have to keep him company! I
am in charge of the powder!

CURT. There was no malice in me when I came here, and I wanted
to run away when I felt myself infected with your hatred, but
now I am moved by an irresistible impulse to hate this man, as I
hate everything that is evil. What can be done?

ALICE. I have learned the tactics from him. Drum up his enemies
and seek allies.

CURT. Just think--that he should get hold of my wife! Why didn't
those two meet a life-time ago? Then there would have been a
battle-royal that had set the earth quaking.

ALICE. But now these souls have spied each other--and yet they
must part. I guess what is his most vulnerable spot--I have long
suspected it----

CURT. Who is his most faithful enemy on the island?

ALICE. The Quartermaster.

CURT. Is he an honest man?

ALICE. He is. And he knows what I--I know too--he knows what the
Sergeant-Major and the Captain have been up to.

CURT. What they have been up to? You don't mean----

ALICE. Defalcations!

CURT. This is terrible! No, I don't want to have any finger in
that mess!

ALICE. Ha-ha! You cannot hit an enemy.

CURT. Formerly I could, but I can do so no longer.

ALICE. Why?

CURT. Because I have discovered--that justice is done anyhow.

ALICE. And you could wait for that? Then your son would already
have been taken away from you. Look at my gray hairs--just feel
how thick it still is, for that matter--He intends to marry
again, and then I shall be free--to do the same--I am free!
And in ten minutes he will be under arrest down below, right
under us--[_stamps her foot on the floor_] right under us--and
I shall dance above his head--I shall dance "The Entry of the
Boyars"--[_makes a few steps with her arms akimbo_] ha-ha-ha-ha!
And I shall play on the piano so that he can hear it.
[_Hammering on the piano_] Oh, the tower is opening its gates,
and the sentry with the drawn sabre will no longer be guarding
me, but him--_Malrough s'en va-t-en guerre_! Him, him, him, the
sentry is going to guard!

CURT. [_Has been watching her with an intoxicated look in his
eyes_] Alice, are you, too, a devil?

ALICE. [_Jumps up on a chair and pulls down the wreaths_] These
we will take along when we depart--the laurels of triumph! And
fluttering ribbons! A little dusty, but eternally green--like my
youth--I am not old, Curt?

CURT. _With shining eyes_] You are a devil!

ALICE. In "Little Hell"--Listen! Now I shall fix my hair
--[_loosens her hair_], dress in two minutes--go to the
Quartermaster in two minutes--and then, up in the air with the
fortress!

CURT. [_As before_] You are a devil!

ALICE. That's what you always used to say when we were children.
Do you remember when we were small and became engaged to each
other? Ha-ha! You were bashful, of course----

CURT. [_Seriously_] Alice!

ALICE. Yes, you were! And it was becoming to you. Do you know
there are gross women who like modest men? And there are said to
be modest men who like gross women--You liked me a little bit,
didn't you?

CURT. I don't know where I am!

ALICE. With an actress whose manners are free, but who is an
excellent lady otherwise. Yes! But now I am free, free, free!
Turn away and I'll change my waist!

_She opens her waist_. CURT _rushes up to her, grabs her in his
arms, lifts her high up, and bites her throat so that she cries
out. Then he drops her on the couch and runs out to the left_.

_Curtain and intermission_.



      _Same stage setting in early evening light. The
      sentry on the battery is still visible through the
      windows in the background. The laurel wreaths are
      hung over the arms of an easy-chair. The hanging lamp
      is lit. Faint music_.

      _The_ CAPTAIN, _pale and hollow-eyed, his hair
      showing touches of gray, dressed in a worn undress
      uniform, with riding-boots, sits at the writing-table
      and plays solitaire. He wears his spectacles. The
      entr'acte music continues after the curtain has been
      raised and until another person enters_.

      _The_ CAPTAIN _plays away at his solitaire, bid with
      a sudden start now and then, when he looks up and
      listens with evident alarm_.

      _He does not seem able to make the solitaire come
      out, so he becomes impatient and gathers up the
      cards. Then he goes to the left-hand window, opens
      it, and throws out the cards. The window (of the
      French type) remains open, rattling on its hinges_.

      _He goes over to the buffet, but is frightened by the
      noise made by the window, so that he turns around
      to see what it is. Takes out three dark-coloured
      square whiskey bottles, examines them carefully--and
      throws them out of the window. Takes out some boxes
      of cigars, smells at one, and throws them out of the
      window_.

      _Next he takes off his spectacles, cleans them
      carefully, and tries how far he can see with them.
      Then he throws them out of the window, stumbles
      against the furniture as if he could not see,
      and lights six candles in a candelabrum on the
      chiffonier. Catches sight of the laurel wreaths,
      picks them up, and goes toward the window, but turns
      back. Folds the wreaths carefully in the piano
      cover, fastens the corners together with pins taken
      from the writing-table, and puts the bundle on a
      chair. Goes to the piano, strikes the keyboard with
      his fists, locks the piano, and throws the key out
      through the window. Then he lights the candles on the
      piano. Goes to the what-not, takes his wife's picture
      from it, looks at this and tears it to pieces,
      dropping the pieces on the floor. The window rattles
      on its hinges, and again he becomes frightened_.

      _Then, after having calmed himself he takes the
      pictures of his son and daughter, kisses them in an
      off-hand way, and puts them into his pocket. All the
      rest of the pictures he sweeps down with his elbow
      and pokes together into a heap with his foot_.

      _Then he sits down at the writing-table, tired out,
      and puts a hand up to his heart. Lights the candle
      on the table and sighs; stares in front of himself
      as if confronted with unpleasant visions. Rises and
      goes over to the chiffonier, opens the lid, takes
      out a bundle of letters tied together with a blue
      silk ribbon, and throws the bundle into the fireplace
      of the glazed brick oven. Closes the chiffonier.
      The telegraph receiver sounds a single click. The_
      CAPTAIN _shrinks together in deadly fear and stands
      fixed to the spot, listening. But hearing nothing
      more from the instrument, he turns to listen in
      the direction of the door on the left. Goes over
      and opens it, takes a step inside the doorway, and
      returns, carrying on his arm a cat whose back he
      strokes. Then he goes out to the right. Now the music
      ceases_.

      ALICE _enters from the background, dressed in a
      walking suit, with gloves and hat on; her hair is
      black; she looks around with surprise at the many
      lighted candles_.

      CURT _enters from the left, nervous_.

ALICE. It looks like Christmas Eve here.

CURT. Well?

ALICE. [_Holds out her hand for him to kiss_] Thank me! [CURT
_kisses her hand unwillingly_] Six witnesses, and four of them
solid as rock. The report has been made, and the answer will
come here by telegraph--right here, into the heart of the
fortress.

CURT. So!

ALICE. You should say "thanks" instead of "so."

CURT. Why has he lit so many candles?

ALICE. Because he is afraid of the dark, of course. Look at the
telegraph key--does it not look like the handle of a coffee
mill? I grind, I grind, and the beans crack as when you pull
teeth----

CURT. What has he been doing in the room here?

ALICE. It looks as if he intended to move. Down below, that's
where you are going to move!

CURT. Don't, Alice--I think it's distressing! He was the friend
of my youth, and he showed me kindness many times when I was in
difficulty--He should be pitied!

ALICE. And how about me, who have done nothing wrong, and who
have had to sacrifice my career to that monster?

CURT. How about that career? Was it so very brilliant?

ALICE. [_Enraged_] What are you saying? Do you know who I am,
what I have been?

CURT. Now, now!

ALICE. Are you beginning already?

CURT. Already?

      ALICE _throws her arms around_ CURT'S _neck and
      kisses him_.

      CURT _takes her by the arms and bites her neck so
      that she screams_.

ALICE. You bite me!

CURT. [_Beyond himself_] Yes, I want to bite your throat and
suck your blood like a lynx. You have aroused the wild beast
in me--that beast which I have tried for years to kill by
privations and self-inflicted tortures. I came here believing
myself a little better than you two, and now I am the vilest of
all. Since I first saw you--in all your odious nakedness--and
since my vision became warped by passion, I have known the full
strength of evil. What is ugly becomes beautiful; what is good
becomes ugly and mean--Come here and I'll choke you--with a
kiss! [_He locks her in his arms_.

ALICE. [_Holds up her left hand_] Behold the mark of the
shackles that you have broken. I was a slave, and you set me
free.

CURT. But I am going to bind you----

ALICE. You?

CURT. I!

ALICE. For a moment I thought you were----

CURT. Pious?

ALICE. Yes, you prated about the fall of man----

CURT. Did I?

ALICE. And I thought you had come here to preach----

CURT. You thought so? In an hour we shall be in the city, and
then you shall see what I am----

ALICE. Then we will go to the theatre to-night, just to show
ourselves. The shame will be his if I run away, don't you see!

CURT. I begin to understand that prison is not enough----

ALICE. No, it is not--there must be shame also.

CURT. A strange world! You commit a shameful act, and the shame
falls on him.

ALICE. Well, if the world be so stupid----

CURT. It is as if these prison walls had absorbed all the
corruption of the criminals, and it gets into you if you merely
breathe this air. You were thinking of the theatre and the
supper, I suppose. I was thinking of my son.

ALICE. [_Strikes him on the mouth with her glove_] Fogey!

      [CURT _lifts his hand as if to strike her_.

ALICE. [_Drawing back] Tout beau_!

CURT. Forgive me!

ALICE. Yes--on your knees! [CURT _kneels down_] Down on your
face! [CURT _touches the ground with his forehead_] Kiss my
foot! [CURT _kisses her foot_] And don't you ever do it again!
Get up!

CURT. [_Rising_] Where have I landed? Where am I?

ALICE. Oh, you know!

CURT. [_Looking around with horror_] I believe almost----

CAPTAIN. [_Enters from the right, looking wretched, leaning on a
cane_] Curt, may I have a talk with you--alone?

ALICE. Is it about that departure in safety?

CAPTAIN. [_Sits down at the sewing-table_] Curt, will you kindly
sit down here by me a little while? And, Alice, will you please
grant me a moment--of peace!

ALICE. What is up now? New signals! [_To_ CURT] Please be
seated. [CURT _sits down reluctantly_] And listen to the words
of age and wisdom--And if a telegram should come--tip me off!
[_Goes out to the left_.

CAPTAIN. [_With dignity, after a pause_] Can you explain a fate
like mine, like ours?

CURT. No more than I can explain my own!

CAPTAIN. What can be the meaning of this jumble?

CURT. In my better moments I have believed that just this was
the meaning--that we should not be able to catch a meaning, and
yet submit----

CAPTAIN. Submit? Without a fixed point outside myself I cannot
submit.

CURT. Quite right, but as a mathematician you should be able to
seek that unknown point when several known ones are given----

CAPTAIN. I have sought it, and--I have not found it!

CURT. Then you have made some mistake in your calculations--do
it all over again!

CAPTAIN. I should do it over again? Tell me, where did you get
your resignation?

CURT. I have none left. Don't overestimate me.

CAPTAIN. As you may have noticed, my understanding of the art of
living has been--elimination! That means: wipe out and pass on!
Very early in life I made myself a bag into which I chucked my
humiliations, and when it was full I dropped it into the sea.
I don't think any man ever suffered so many humiliations as I
have. But when I wiped them out and passed on they ceased to
exist.

CURT. I have noticed that you have wrought both your life and
your environment out of your poetical imagination.

CAPTAIN. How could I have lived otherwise? How could I have
endured? [_Puts his hand over his heart_.

CURT. How are you doing?

CAPTAIN. Poorly. [Pause] Then comes a moment when the faculty
for what you call poetical imagination gives out. And then
reality leaps forth in all its nakedness--It is frightful! [_He
is now speaking in a voice of lachrymose senility, and with
his lower jaw drooping_] Look here, my dear friend--[_controls
himself and speaks in his usual voice_] forgive me!--When I was
in the city and consulted the doctor [_now the tearful voice
returns_] he said that I was played out--[_in his usual voice_]
and that I couldn't live much longer.

CURT. Was _that_ what he said?

CAPTAIN. [_With tearful voice_] That's what he said!

CURT. So it was not true?

CAPTAIN. What? Oh--no, that was not true. [_Pause_.

CURT. Was the rest of it not true either?

CAPTAIN. What do you mean?

CURT. That my son was ordered to report here as cadet?

CAPTAIN. I never heard of it.

CURT. Do you know--your ability to wipe out your own misdeeds is
miraculous!

CAPTAIN. I don't understand what you are talking of.

CURT. Then you have come to the end!

CAPTAIN. Well, there is not much left!

CURT. Tell me, perhaps you never applied for that divorce which
would bring your wife into disgrace?

CAPTAIN. Divorce? No, I have not heard of it.

CURT, [_Rising_] Will you admit, then, that you have been lying?

CAPTAIN. You employ such strong words, my friend. All of us need
forbearance.

CURT. Oh, you have come to see that?

CAPTAIN. [_Firmly, with clear voice_] Yes, I have come to see
that--And for this reason, Curt, please forgive me! Forgive
everything!

CURT. That was a manly word! But I have nothing to forgive you.
And I am not the man you believe me to be. No longer now! Least
of all one worthy of receiving your confessions!

CAPTAIN. [_With clear voice_] Life seemed so peculiar--so
contrary, so malignant--ever since my childhood--and people
seemed so bad that I grew bad also----

CURT. [_On his feet, perturbed, and glancing at the telegraph
instrument_] Is it possible to close off an instrument like that?

CAPTAIN. Hardly.

CURT. [_With increasing alarm_] Who is Sergeant-Major Östberg?

CAPTAIN. An honest fellow, but something of a busybody, I should
say.

CURT. And who is the Quartermaster?

CAPTAIN. He is my enemy, of course, but I have nothing bad to
say of him.

CURT. [_Looking out through the window, where a lantern is seen
moving to and fro_] What are they doing with the lantern out on
the battery?

CAPTAIN. Do you see a lantern?

CURT. Yes, and people moving about.

CAPTAIN. I suppose it is what we call a service squad.

CURT. What is that?

CAPTAIN. A few men and a corporal. Probably some poor wretch
that has to be locked up.

CURT. Oh! [_Pause_.

CAPTAIN. Now, when you know Alice, how do you like her?

CURT. I cannot tell--I have no understanding of people at all.
She is as inexplicable to me as you are, or as I am myself. For
I am reaching the age when wisdom makes this acknowledgment:
I know nothing, I understand nothing; But when I observe an
action, I like to get at the motive behind it. Why did you push
her into the water?

CAPTAIN. I don't know. It merely seemed quite natural to me, as
she was standing on the pier, that she ought to be in the water.

CURT. Have you ever regretted it?

CAPTAIN. Never!

CURT. That's strange!

CAPTAIN. Of course, it is! So strange that I cannot realise that
I am the man who has been guilty of such a mean act.

CURT. Have you not expected her to take some revenge?

CAPTAIN. Well, she seems to have taken it in full measure; and
that, too, seems no less natural to me.

CURT. What has so suddenly brought you to this cynical
resignation?

CAPTAIN. Since I looked death in the face, life has presented
itself from a different viewpoint. Tell me, if you were to judge
between Alice and myself, whom would you place in the right?

CURT. Neither of you. But to both of you I should give endless
compassion--perhaps a little more of it to you!

CAPTAIN. Give me your hand, Curt!

CURT. [_Gives him one hand and puts the other one on the_
CAPTAIN'S _shoulder_] Old boy!

ALICE. [_In from the left, carrying a sunshade_] Well, how
harmonious! Oh, friendship! Has there been no telegram yet?

CURT. [_Coldly_] No.

ALICE. This delay makes me impatient, and when I grow impatient
I push matters along--Look, Curt, how I give him the final
bullet. And now he'll bite the grass! First, I load--I know
all about rifle practice, the famous rifle practice of which
less than 5,000 copies were sold--and then I aim--fire! [_She
takes aim with her sunshade_] How is your new wife? The young,
beautiful, unknown one? You don't know! But I know how my
lover is doing. [_Puts her arms around the neck of_ CURT _and
kisses him; he thrusts her away from himself_] He is well,
although still a little bashful! You wretch, whom I have never
loved--you, who were too conceited to be jealous--you never saw
how I was leading you by the nose!

      _The_ CAPTAIN _draws the sabre and makes a leap at
      her, aiming at her several futile blows that only hit
      the furniture_.

ALICE. Help! Help!

[CURT _does not move_.

CAPTAIN. [_Falls with the sabre in his hand_] Judith, avenge me!

ALICE. Hooray! He's dead!

      [CURT _withdraws toward the door in the background_.

CAPTAIN. [_Gets on his feet_] Not yet! [_Sheathes the sabre and
sits down in the easy-chair by the sewing-table_] Judith! Judith!

ALICE. [_Drawing nearer to_ CURT] Now I go--with you!

CURT. [_Pushes her back with such force that she sinks to her
knees_] Go back to the hell whence you came! Good-bye for ever!
[_Goes to the door_.

CAPTAIN. Don't leave me Curt; she will kill me!

ALICE. Don't desert me, Curt--don't desert us!

CURT. Good-bye! [_Goes out_.

ALICE. [_With a sudden change of attitude_] The wretch! That's a
friend for you!

CAPTAIN. [_Softly_] Forgive me, Alice, and come here--come quick!

ALICE. [_Over to the_ CAPTAIN] That's the worst rascal and
hypocrite I have met in my life! Do you know, you are a man
after all!

CAPTAIN. Listen, Alice! I cannot live much longer.

ALICE. Is that so?

CAPTAIN. The doctor has said so.

ALICE. Then there was no truth in the rest either?

CAPTAIN. No.

ALICE. [_In despair_] Oh, what have I done!

CAPTAIN. There is help for everything.

ALICE. No, this is beyond helping!

CAPTAIN. Nothing is beyond helping, if you only wipe it out and
pass on.

ALICE. But the telegram--the telegram!

CAPTAIN. Which telegram?

ALICE. [_On her knees beside the_ CAPTAIN] Are we then cast
out? Must this happen? I have sprung a mine under myself, under
us. Why did you have to tell untruths? And why should that man
come here to tempt me? We are lost! Your magnanimity might have
helped everything, forgiven everything!

CAPTAIN. What is it that cannot be forgiven? What is it that I
have not already forgiven you?

ALICE. You are right--but there is no help for this.

CAPTAIN. I cannot guess it, although I know your ingenuity when
it comes to villanies----

ALICE. Oh, if I could only get out of this, I should care for
you--I should love you, Edgar!

CAPTAIN. Listen to me! Where do I stand?

ALICE. Don't you think anybody can help us--well, no man can!

CAPTAIN. Who could then help?

ALICE. [_Looking the_ CAPTAIN _straight in the eye_] I don't
know--Think of it, what is to become of the children with their
name dishonoured----

CAPTAIN. Have you dishonoured that name?

ALICE. Not I! Not I! And then they must leave school! And as
they go out into the world, they will be lonely as we, and cruel
as we--Then you didn't meet Judith either, I understand now?

CAPTAIN. No, but wipe it out!

      _The telegraph receiver clicks_. ALICE _flies up_.

ALICE. [Screams] Now ruin is overtaking us! [_To the_ CAPTAIN]
Don't listen!

CAPTAIN. [_Quietly_] I am not going to listen, dear child--just
calm yourself!

ALICE. [_Standing by the instrument, raises herself on tiptoe
in order to look out through the window_] Don't listen! Don't
listen!

CAPTAIN. [_Holding his hands over his ears_] Lisa, child, I am
stopping up my ears.

ALICE. [_On her knees, with lifted hands_] God, help us! The
squad is coming--[_Weeping and sobbing_] God in heaven!

      _She appears to be moving her lips as if in silent
      prayer_.

      _The telegraph receiver continues to click for a
      while and a long white strip of paper seems to crawl
      out of the instrument. Then complete silence prevails
      once more_.

ALICE. [_Rises, tears off the paper strip, and reads it in
silence. Then she turns her eyes upward for a moment. Goes over
to the_ CAPTAIN _and kisses him on the forehead_] That is over
now! It was nothing!

      _Sits down in the other chair, puts her handkerchief
      to her face, and breaks into a violent spell of
      weeping_.

CAPTAIN. What kind of secrets are these?

ALICE. Don't ask! It is over now!

CAPTAIN. AS you please, child.

ALICE. You would not have spoken like that three days ago--what
has done it?

CAPTAIN. Well, dear, when I fell down that first time, I went a
little way on the other side of the grave. What I saw has been
forgotten, but the impression of it still remains.

ALICE. And it was?

CAPTAIN. A hope--for something better!

ALICE. Something better?

CAPTAIN. Yes. That this could be the real life, I have, in fact,
never believed: it is death--or something still worse!

ALICE. And we----

CAPTAIN. Have probably been set to torment each other--so it
seems at least!

ALICE. Have we tormented each other enough?

CAPTAIN. Yes, I think so! And upset things! [_Looks around_]
Suppose we put things to rights? And clean house?

ALICE. Yes, if it can be done.

CAPTAIN. [_Gets up to survey the room_] It can't be done in one
day--no, it can't!

ALICE. In two, then! Many days!

CAPTAIN. Let us hope so! [_Pause. Sits down again_] So you
didn't get free this time after all! But then, you didn't get
me locked up either! [ALICE _looks staggered_] Yes, I know you
wanted to put me in prison, but I wipe it out. I suppose you
have done worse than that--[ALICE _is speechless_] And I was
innocent of those defalcations.

ALICE. And now you intend me to become your nurse?

CAPTAIN. If you are willing!

ALICE. What else could I do?

CAPTAIN. I don't know!

ALICE. [_Sits down, numbed and crushed_] These are the eternal
torments! Is there, then, no end to them?

CAPTAIN. Yes, if we are patient. Perhaps life begins when death
comes.

ALICE. If it were so! [_Pause_.

CAPTAIN. You think Curt a hypocrite?

ALICE. Of course I do!

CAPTAIN. And I don't! But all who come near us turn evil and
go their way. Curt was weak, and the evil is strong! [_Pause_]
How commonplace life has become! Formerly blows were struck;
now you shake your fist at the most! I am fairly certain
that, three months from now, we shall celebrate our silver
wedding--with Curt as best man--and with the Doctor and Gerda
among the guests. The Quartermaster will make the speech and
the Sergeant-Major will lead the cheering. And if I know the
Colonel right, he will come on his own invitation--Yes, you may
laugh! But do you recall the silver wedding of Adolph--in the
Fusiliers? The bride had to carry her wedding ring on the right
hand, because the groom in a tender moment had chopped off her
left ring finger with his dirk. [ALICE _puts her handkerchief
to her mouth in order to repress her laughter_] Are you crying?
No, I believe you are laughing! Yes, child, partly we weep and
partly we laugh. Which is the right thing to do?--Don't ask
me! The other day I read in a newspaper that a man had been
divorced seven times--which means that he had been married seven
times--and finally, at the age of ninety-eight, he ran away with
his first wife and married her again. Such is love! If life be
serious, or merely a joke, is more than I can decide. Often it
is most painful when a joke, and its seriousness is after all
more agreeable and peaceful. But when at last you try to be
serious, somebody comes and plays a joke on you--as Curt, for
instance! Do you want a silver wedding? [ALICE _remains silent_]
Oh, say yes! They will laugh at us, but what does it matter? We
may laugh also, or keep serious, as the occasion may require.

ALICE. Well, all right!

CAPTAIN. Silver wedding, then! [_Rising_] Wipe out and pass on!
Therefore, let us pass on!

_Curtain_.




PART II



CHARACTERS

EDGAR
ALICE
CURT
ALLAN, _the son of_ CURT
JUDITH, _the daughter of_ EDGAR
THE LIEUTENANT



      _A rectangular drawing-room in white and gold.
      The rear wall is broken by severed French windows
      reaching down to the floor. These stand open,
      revealing a garden terrace outside. Along this
      terrace, serving as a public promenade, runs a stone
      balustrade, on which are ranged pots of blue and
      white faience, with petunias and scarlet geraniums
      in them. Beyond, in the background, can be seen the
      shore battery with a sentry pacing back and forth. In
      the far distance, the open sea_.

      _At the left of the drawing-room stands a sofa
      with gilded wood-work. In front of it are a table
      and chairs. At the right is a grand piano, a
      writing-table, and an open fireplace_.

      _In the foreground, an American easy-chair_.

      _By the writing-table is a standing lamp of copper
      with a table attached to it_.

      _On the walls are severed old-fashioned oil
      paintings_.

      ALLAN _is sitting at the writing-table, engrossed
      in some mathematical problem_. JUDITH _enters from
      the background, in summer dress, short skirt, hair
      in a braid down her back, hat in one hand and tennis
      racket in the other. She stops in the doorway_. ALLAN
      _rises, serious and respectful_.


JUDITH. [_In serious but friendly tone_] Why don't you come and
play tennis?

ALLAN. [_Bashful, struggling with his emotion_] I am very
busy----

JUDITH. Didn't you see that I had made my bicycle point toward
the oak, and not away from it?

ALLAN. Yes, I saw it.

JUDITH. Well, what does it mean?

ALLAN. It means--that you want me to come and play tennis--but
my duty--I have some problems to work out--and your father is a
rather exacting teacher----

JUDITH. Do you like him?

ALLAN. Yes, I do. He takes such interest in all his pupils----

JUDITH. He takes an interest in everything and everybody. Won't
you come?

ALLAN. You know I should like to--but I must not!

JUDITH. I'll ask papa to give you leave.

ALLAN. Don't do that. It will only cause talk.

JUDITH. Don't you think I can manage him? He wants what I want.

ALLAN. I suppose that is because you are so hard.

JUDITH. You should be hard also.

ALLAN. I don't belong to the wolf family.

JUDITH. Then you are a sheep.

ALLAN. Rather that.

JUDITH. Tell me why you don't want to come and play tennis?

ALLAN. You know it.

JUDITH. Tell me anyhow. The Lieutenant----

ALLAN. Yes, you don't care for me at all, but you cannot enjoy
yourself with the Lieutenant unless I am present, so you can see
me suffer.

JUDITH. Am I as cruel as that? I didn't know it.

ALLAN. Well, now you know it.

JUDITH. Then I shall do better hereafter, for I don't want to be
cruel, I don't want to be bad--in your eyes.

ALLAN. You say this only to fasten your hold on me. I am already
your slave, but it does not satisfy you. The slave must be
tortured and thrown to the wild beasts. You have already that
other fellow in your clutches--what do you want with me then?
Let me go my own way, and you can go yours.

JUDITH. Do you send me away? [ALLAN _does not answer_] Then I
go! As second cousins, we shall have to meet now and then, but I
am not going to bother you any longer.

      [ALLAN _sits down at the table and returns to his
      problem_.

JUDITH. [_Instead of going away, comes down the stage and
approaches gradually the table where_ ALLAN _is sitting_] Don't
be afraid, I am going at once--I wanted only to see how the
Master of Quarantine lives--[_Looks around_] White and gold--a
Bechstein grand--well, well! We are still in the fort since
papa was pensioned--in the tower where mamma has been kept
twenty-five years--and we are there on sufferance at that.
You--you are rich----

ALLAN. [_Calmly_] We are not rich.

JUDITH. So you say, but you are always wearing fine clothes
--but whatever you wear, for that matter, is becoming to you. Do
you hear what I say? [_Drawing nearer_.

ALLAN. [_Submissively_] I do.

JUDITH. How can you hear when you keep on figuring, or whatever
you are doing?

ALLAN. I don't use my eyes to listen with.

JUDITH. Your eyes--have you ever looked at them in the mirror?

ALLAN. Go away!

JUDITH. You despise me, do you?

ALLAN. Why, girl, I am not thinking of you at all.

JUDITH. [_Still nearer_] Archimedes is deep in his figures when
the soldier comes and cuts him down.

      [_Stirs his papers about with the racket_.

ALLAN. Don't touch my papers!

JUDITH. That's what Archimedes said also. Now you are thinking
something foolish--you are thinking that I can not live without
you---

ALLAN. Why can't you leave me alone?

JUDITH. Be courteous, and I'll help you with your
examinations----

ALLAN. You?

JUDITH. Yes, I know the examiners----

ALLAN. [_Sternly_] And what of it?

JUDITH. Don't you know that one should stand well with the
teachers?

ALLAN. Do you mean your father and the Lieutenant?

JUDITH. And the Colonel!

ALLAN. And then you mean that your protection would enable me to
shirk my work?

JUDITH. You are a bad translator----

ALLAN. Of a bad original----

JUDITH. Be ashamed!

ALLAN. So I am--both on your behalf and my own! I am ashamed of
having listened to you--Why don't you go?

JUDITH. Because I know you appreciate my company--Yes, you
manage always to pass by my window. You have always some errand
that brings you into the city with the same boat that I take.
You cannot go for a sail without having me to look after the jib.

ALLAN. But a young girl shouldn't say that kind of things!

JUDITH. Do you mean to say that I am a child?

ALLAN. Sometimes you are a good child, and sometimes a bad
woman. Me you seem to have picked to be your sheep.

JUDITH. You are a sheep, and that's why I am going to protect
you.

ALLAN. [_Rising_] The wolf makes a poor shepherd! You want to
eat me--that is the secret of it, I suppose. You want to put
your beautiful eyes in pawn to get possession of my head.

JUDITH. Oh, you have been looking at my eyes? I didn't expect
that much courage of you.

      ALLAN _collects his papers and starts to go out
      toward the right_.

      JUDITH _places herself in front of the door_.

ALLAN. Get out of my way, or----

JUDITH. Or?

ALLAN. If you were a boy--bah! But you are a girl.

JUDITH. And then?

ALLAN. If you had any pride at all, you would be gone, as you
may regard yourself as shown the door.

JUDITH. I'll get back at you for that!

ALLAN. I don't doubt it!

JUDITH. [_Goes enraged toward the background_]
I--shall-get--back--at you for that! [_Goes out_.

CURT. [_Enters from the left_] Where are you going, Allan?

ALLAN. Oh, is that you?

CURT. Who was it that left in such hurry--so that the bushes
shook?

ALLAN. It was Judith.

CURT. She is a little impetuous, but a fine girl.

ALLAN. When a girl is cruel and rude, she is always said to be a
fine girl.

CURT. Don't be so severe, Allan! Are you not satisfied with your
new relatives?

ALLAN. I like Uncle Edgar----

CURT. Yes, he has many good sides. How about your other
teachers--the Lieutenant, for instance?

ALLAN. He's so uncertain. Sometimes he seems to have a grudge
against me.

CURT. Oh, no! You just go here and make people "seem" this or
that. Don't brood, but look after your own affairs, do what is
proper, and leave others to their own concerns.

ALLAN. So I do, but--they won't leave me alone. They pull you
in--as the cuttlefish down at the landing--they don't bite, but
they stir up vortices that suck----

CURT. You have some tendency to melancholia, I think. Don't you
feel at home here with me? Is there anything you miss?

ALLAN. I have never been better off, but--there is something
here that smothers me.

CURT. Here by the sea? Are you not fond of the sea?

ALLAN. Yes, the open sea. But along the shores you find
eelgrass, cuttlefish, jellyfish, sea-nettles, or whatever they
are called.

CURT. You shouldn't stay indoors so much. Go out and play tennis.

ALLAN. Oh, that's no fun!

CURT. You are angry with Judith, I guess?

ALLAN. Judith?

CURT. You are so exacting toward people--it is not wise, for
then you become isolated.

ALLAN. I am not exacting, but--It feels as if I were lying at
the bottom of a pile of wood and had to wait my turn to get into
the fire--and it weighs on me--all that is above weighs me down.

CURT. Bide your turn. The pile grows smaller----

ALLAN. Yes, but so slowly, so slowly. And in the meantime I lie
here and grow mouldy.

CURT. It is not pleasant to be young. And yet you young ones are
envied.

ALLAN. Are we? Would you change?

CURT. No, thanks!

ALLAN. Do you know what is worse than anything else? It is to
sit still and keep silent while the old ones talk nonsense--I
know that I am better informed than they on some matters--and
yet I must keep silent. Well, pardon me, I am not counting you
among the old.

CURT. Why not?

ALLAN. Perhaps because we have only just now become
acquainted----

CURT. And because--your ideas of me have undergone a change?

ALLAN. Yes.

CURT. During the years we were separated, I suppose you didn't
always think of me in a friendly way?

ALLAN. No.

CURT. Did you ever see a picture of me?

ALLAN. One, and it was very unfavourable.

CURT. And old-looking?

ALLAN. Yes.

CURT. Ten years ago my hair turned gray in a single night--it
has since then resumed its natural color without my doing
anything for it--Let us talk of something else! There comes your
aunt--my cousin. How do you like her?

ALLAN. I don't want to tell!

CURT. Then I shall not ask you.

ALICE. [_Enters dressed in a very light-colored walking-suit and
carrying a sunshade_] Good morning, Curt.

      [_Gives him a glance signifying that_ ALLAN _should
      leave_.

CURT. [_To_ Allan] Leave us, please.

      ALLAN _goes out to the right_.

      ALICE _takes a seat on the sofa to the left_.

      CURT _sits down on a chair near her_.

ALICE. [_In some confusion_] He will be here in a moment, so you
need not feel embarrassed.

CURT. And why should I?

ALICE. You, with your strictness----

CURT. Toward myself, yes----

ALICE. Of course--Once I forgot myself, when in you I saw the
liberator, but you kept your self-control--and for that reason
we have a right to forget--what has never been.

CURT. Forget it then!

ALICE. However--I don't think _he_ has forgotten----

CURT. You are thinking of that night when his heart gave out
and he fell on the floor--and when you rejoiced too quickly,
thinking him already dead?

ALICE. Yes. Since then he has recovered; but when he gave up
drinking, he learned to keep silent, and now he is terrible. He
is up to something that I cannot make out----

CURT. Your husband, Alice, is a harmless fool who has shown me
all sorts of kindnesses----

ALICE. Beware of his kindnesses. I know them.

CURT. Well, well----

ALICE. He has then blinded you also? Can you not see the danger?
Don't you notice the snares?

CURT. No.

ALICE. Then your ruin is certain.

CURT. Oh, mercy!

ALICE. Think only, I have to sit here and see disaster stalking
you like a cat--I point at it, but you cannot see it.

CURT. Allan, with his unspoiled vision, cannot see it either. He
sees nothing but Judith, for that matter, and this seems to me a
safeguard of our good relationship.

ALICE. Do you know Judith?

CURT. A flirtatious little thing, with a braid down her back and
rather too short skirts----

ALICE. Exactly! But the other day I saw her dressed up in long
skirts--and then she was a young lady--and not so very young
either, when her hair was put up.

CURT. She is somewhat precocious, I admit.

ALICE. And she is playing with Allan.

CURT. That's all right, so long as it remains play.

ALICE. So _that_ is all right?--Now Edgar will be here soon, and
he will take the easy-chair--he loves it with such passion that
he could steal it.

CURT. Why, he can have it!

ALICE. Let him sit over there, and we'll stay here. And when he
talks--he is always talkative in the morning--when he talks of
insignificant things, I'll translate them for you----

CURT. Oh, my dear Alice, you are too deep, far too deep. What
could I have to fear as long as I look after my quarantine
properly and otherwise behave decently?

ALICE. You believe in justice and honour and all that sort of
thing.

CURT. Yes, and it is what experience has taught me. Once I
believed the very opposite--and paid dearly for it!

ALICE. Now he's coming!

CURT. I have never seen you so frightened before.

ALICE. My bravery was nothing but ignorance of the danger.

CURT. Danger? Soon you'll have me frightened too!

ALICE. Oh, if I only could--There!

      _The_ CAPTAIN _enters from the background, in
      civilian dress, black Prince Albert buttoned all the
      way, military cap, and a cane with silver handle.
      He greets them with a nod and goes straight to the
      easy-chair, where he sits down_.

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] Let him speak first.

CAPTAIN. This is a splendid chair you have here, dear Curt;
perfectly splendid.

CURT. I'll give it to you, if you will accept it.

CAPTAIN. That was not what I meant----

CURT. But I mean it seriously. How much have I not received from
you?

CAPTAIN. [_Garrulously_] Oh, nonsense! And when I sit here, I
can overlook the whole island, all the walks; I can see all the
people on their verandahs, all the ships on the sea, that are
coming in and going out. You have really happened on the best
piece of this island, which is certainly not an island of the
blessed. Or what do you say, Alice? Yes, they call it "Little
Hell," and here Curt has built himself a paradise, but without
an Eve, of course, for when she appeared, then the paradise came
to an end. I say--do you know that this was a royal hunting
lodge?

CURT. So I have heard.

CAPTAIN. You live royally, you, but, if I may say so myself, you
have me to thank for it.

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] There--now he wants to steal you.

CURT. I have to thank you for a good deal.

CAPTAIN. Fudge! Tell me, did you get the wine cases?

CURT. Yes.

CAPTAIN. And you are satisfied?

CURT. Quite satisfied, and you may tell your dealer so.

CAPTAIN. His goods are always prime quality----

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] At second-rate prices, and you have to pay
the difference.

CAPTAIN. What did you say, Alice?

ALICE. I? Nothing!

CAPTAIN. Well, when this quarantine station was about to be
established, I had in mind applying for the position--and so I
made a study of quarantine methods.

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] Now he's lying!

CAPTAIN. [_Boastfully_] And I did not share the antiquated
ideas concerning disinfection which were then accepted by the
government. For I placed myself on the side of the Neptunists
--so called because they emphasise the use of water----

CURT. Beg your pardon, but I remember distinctly that it was I
who preached water, and you fire, at that time.

CAPTAIN. I? Nonsense!

ALICE. [_Aloud_] Yes, I remember that, too.

CAPTAIN. You?

CURT. I remember it so much the better because----

CAPTAIN. [_Cutting him short_] Well, it's possible, but it does
not matter. [_Raising his voice_] However--we have now reached
a point where a new state of affairs--[_To_ CURT, _who wants to
interrupt_] just a moment!--has begun to prevail--and when the
methods of quarantining are about to become revolutionized.

CURT. By the by, do you know who is writing those stupid
articles in that periodical?

CAPTAIN. [_Flushing_] No, I don't know, but why do you call them
stupid?

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] Look out! It is he who writes them.

CURT. He?--[_To the_ CAPTAIN] Not very well advised, at least.

CAPTAIN. Well, are you the man to judge of that?

ALICE. Are we going to have a quarrel?

CURT. Not at all.

CAPTAIN. It is hard to keep peace on this island, but we ought
to set a good example----

CURT. Yes, can you explain this to me? When I came here I made
friends with all the officials and became especially intimate
with the regimental auditor--as intimate as men are likely to
become at our age. And then, in a little while--it was shortly
after your recovery--one after another began to grow cold toward
me--and yesterday the auditor avoided me on the promenade. I
cannot tell you how it hurt me! [_The_ CAPTAIN _remains silent_]
Have you noticed any ill-feeling toward yourself?

CAPTAIN. No, on the contrary.

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] Don't you understand that he has been
stealing your friends?

CURT. [_To the_ CAPTAIN] I wondered whether it might have
anything to do with this new stock issue to which I refused to
subscribe.

CAPTAIN. No, no--But can you tell me why you didn't subscribe?

CURT. Because I have already put my small savings into your soda
factory. And also because a new issue means that the old stock
is shaky.

CAPTAIN. [_Preoccupied_] That's a splendid lamp you have. Where
did you get it?

CURT. In the city, of course.

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] Look out for your lamp!

CURT. [_To the_ CAPTAIN] You must not think that I am ungrateful
or distrustful, Edgar.

CAPTAIN. No, but it shows small confidence to withdraw from an
undertaking which you have helped to start.

CURT. Why, ordinary prudence bids everybody save himself and
what is his.

CAPTAIN. Save? Is there any danger then? Do you think anybody
wants to rob you?

CURT. Why such sharp words?

CAPTAIN. Were you not satisfied when I helped you to place your
money at six per cent.?

CURT. Yes, and even grateful.

CAPTAIN. You are not grateful--it is not in your nature, but
this you cannot help.

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] Listen to him!

CURT. My nature has shortcomings enough, and my struggle
against them has not been very successful, but I do recognise
obligations----

CAPTAIN. Show it then! [_Reaches out his hand to pick up a
newspaper_] Why, what is this? A death notice? [_Reads_] The
Health Commissioner is dead.

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] Now he is speculating in the corpse----

CAPTAIN. [_As if to himself_] This is going to bring about
certain--changes----

CURT. In what respect?

CAPTAIN. [_Rising_] That remains to be seen.

ALICE. [_To the_ CAPTAIN] Where are you going?

CAPTAIN. I think I'll have to go to the city--[_Catches sight of
a letter on the writing-table, picks it up as if unconsciously,
reads the address, and puts it back_] Oh, I hope you will pardon
my absent-mindedness.

CURT. No harm done.

CAPTAIN. Why, that's Allan's drawing case. Where is the boy?

CURT. He is out playing with the girls.

CAPTAIN. That big boy? I don't like it. And Judith must not be
running about like that. You had better keep an eye on your
young gentleman, and I'll look after my young lady. [_Goes over
to the piano and strikes a few notes_] Splendid tone in this
instrument. A Steinbech, isn't it?

CURT. A Bechstein.

CAPTAIN. Yes, you are well fixed. Thank me for bringing you here.

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] He lies, for he tried to keep you away.

CAPTAIN. Well, good-bye for a while. I am going to take the next
boat.

      [_Scrutinises the paintings on the walls as he goes
      out_.

ALICE. Well?

CURT. Well?

ALICE. I can't see through his plans yet. But--tell me one
thing. This envelope he looked at--from whom is the letter?

CURT. I am sorry to admit--it was my one secret.

ALICE. And he ferreted it out. Can you see that he knows
witchery, as I have told you before? Is there anything printed
on the envelope?

CURT. Yes--"The Citizens' Union."

ALICE. Then he has guessed your secret. You want to get into
the Riksdag, I suppose. And now you'll see that he goes there
instead of you.

CURT. Has he ever thought of it?

ALICE. No, but he is thinking of it now. I read it on his face
while he was looking at the envelope.

CURT. That's why he has to go to the city?

ALICE. No, he made up his mind to go when he read the death
notice.

CURT. What has he to gain by the death of the Health
Commissioner?

ALICE. Hard to tell! Perhaps the man was an enemy who had stood
in the way of his plans.

CURT. If he be as terrible as you say, then there is reason to
fear him.

ALICE. Didn't you hear how he wanted to steal you, to tie your
hands by means of pretended obligations that do not exist? For
instance, he has done nothing to get you this position, but has,
on the contrary, tried to keep you out of it. He is a man-thief,
an insect, one of those wood-borers that eat up your insides so
that one day you find yourself as hollow as a dying pine tree.
He hates you, although he is bound to you by the memory of your
youthful friendship----

CURT. How keen-witted we are made by our hatreds!

ALICE. And stupid by our loves--blind and stupid!

CURT. Oh, no, don't say that!

ALICE. Do you know what is meant by a vampire? They say it is
the soul of a dead person seeking a body in which it may live
as a parasite. Edgar is dead--ever since he fell down on the
floor that time. You see, he has no interests of his own, no
personality, no initiative. But if he can only get hold of some
other person he hangs on to him, sends down roots into him, and
begins to flourish and blossom. Now he has fastened himself on
you.

CURT. If he comes too close I'll shake him off.

ALICE. Try to shake off a burr! Listen: do you know why he does
not want Judith and Allan to play?

CURT. I suppose he is concerned about their feelings.

ALICE. Not at all. He wants to marry Judith to--the Colonel!

CURT. [_Shocked_] That old widower!

ALICE. Yes.

CURT. Horrible! And Judith?

ALICE. If she could get the General, who is eighty, she would
take him in order to bully the Colonel, who is sixty. To bully,
you know, that's the aim of her life. To trample down and
bully--there you have the motto of _that_ family.

CURT. Can this be Judith? That maiden fair and proud and
splendid?

ALICE. Oh, I know all about that! May I sit here and write a
letter?

CURT. [_Puts the writing-table in order_] With pleasure.

ALICE. [_Takes off her gloves and sits down at the
writing-table_] Now we'll try our hand at the art of war. I
failed once when I tried to slay my dragon. But now I have
mastered the trade.

CURT. Do you know that it is necessary to load before you fire?

ALICE. Yes, and with ball cartridges at that!

      CURT _withdraws to the right_.

      ALICE _ponders and writes_.

      ALLAN _comes rushing in without noticing_ Alice _and
      throws himself face downward on the sofa. He is
      weeping convulsively into a lace handkerchief_.

ALICE. [_Watches him for a while. Then she rises and goes over
to the sofa. Speaks in a tender voice_] Allan!

      ALLAN _sits up disconcertedly and hides the
      handkerchief behind his back_.

ALICE. [_Tenderly, womanly, and with true emotion_] You should
not be afraid of me, Allan--I am not dangerous to you--What is
wrong? Are you sick?

ALLAN. Yes.

ALICE. In what way?

ALLAN. I don't know.

ALICE. Have you a headache?

ALLAN. No.

ALICE. And your chest? Pain?

ALLAN. Yes.

ALICE. Pain--pain--as if your heart wanted to melt away. And it
pulls, pulls----

ALLAN. How do you know?

ALICE. And then you wish to die--that you were already
dead--and everything seems so hard. And you can only think of
one thing--always the same--but if two are thinking of the
same thing, then sorrow falls heavily on one of them. [Allan
_forgets himself and begins to pick at the handkerchief_]
That's the sickness which no one can cure. You cannot eat
and you cannot drink; you want only to weep, and you weep so
bitterly--especially out in the woods where nobody can see you,
for at that kind of sorrow all men laugh--men who are so cruel!
Dear me! What do you want of her? Nothing! You don't want to
kiss her mouth, for you feel that you would die if you did. When
your thoughts run to her, you feel as if death were approaching.
And it is death, child--that sort of death--which brings life.
But you don't understand it yet! I smell violets--it is herself.
[_Steps closer to_ ALLAN _and takes the handkerchief gently away
from him._] It is she, it is she everywhere, none but she!
Oh, oh, oh! [ALLAN _cannot help burying his face in_ ALICE's
_bosom_] Poor boy! Poor boy! Oh, how it hurts, how it hurts!
[_Wipes off his tears with the handkerchief_] There, there! Cry
--cry to your heart's content. There now! Then the heart grows
lighter--But now, Allan, rise up and be a man, or she will not
look at you--she, the cruel one, who is not cruel. Has she
tormented you? With the Lieutenant? You must make friends with
the Lieutenant, so that you two can talk of her. That gives a
little ease also.

ALLAN. I don't want to see the Lieutenant!

ALICE. Now look here, little boy, it won't be long before the
Lieutenant seeks you out in order to get a chance to talk of
her. For--[ALLAN _looks up with a ray of hope on his face_]
Well, shall I be nice and tell you? [ALLAN _droops his head_] He
is just as unhappy as you are.

ALLAN. [_Happy_] No?

ALICE. Yes, indeed, and he needs somebody to whom he may
unburden his heart when Judith has wounded him. You seem to
rejoice in advance?

ALLAN. Does she not want the Lieutenant?

ALICE. She does not want you either, dear boy, for she wants
the Colonel. [ALLAN _is saddened again_] Is it raining again?
Well, the handkerchief you cannot have, for Judith _is_ careful
about her belongings and wants her dozen complete. [ALLAN _looks
dashed_] Yes, my boy, such is Judith. Sit over there now, while
I write another letter, and then you may do an errand for me.

      [_Sits down at the writing-table and begins to write
      again_.

LIEUTENANT. [_Enters from the background, with a melancholy
face, but without being ridiculous. Without noticing_ ALICE
_he makes straight for_ ALLAN] I say, Cadet--[ALLAN _rises and
stands at attention_] Please be seated.

      ALICE _watches them_.

      _The_ LIEUTENANT _goes up to_ ALLAN _and sits down
      beside him. Sighs, takes out a lace handkerchief just
      like the other one, and wipes his forehead with it_.

      ALLAN _stares greedily at the handkerchief_.

      _The_ LIEUTENANT _looks sadly at_ ALLAN.

      ALICE. _coughs_.

      _The_ LIEUTENANT _jumps up and stands at attention_.

ALICE. Please be seated.

LIEUTENANT. I beg your pardon, madam----

ALICE. Never mind! Please sit down and keep the Cadet
company--he is feeling a little lonely here on the island.
[_Writes_.

LIEUTENANT. [_Conversing with_ ALLAN _in low tone and uneasily_]
It is awfully hot.

ALLAN. Rather.

LIEUTENANT. Have you finished the sixth book yet?

ALLAN. I have just got to the last proposition.

LIEUTENANT. That's a tough one. [_Silence_] Have you--[_seeking
for words_] played tennis to-day?

ALLAN. No-o--the sun was too hot.

LIEUTENANT. [_In despair, but without any comical effect_] Yes,
it's awfully hot to-day!

ALLAN. [_In a whisper_] Yes, it is very hot. [_Silence_.

LIEUTENANT. Have you--been out sailing to-day?

ALLAN. No-o, I couldn't get anybody to tend the jib.

LIEUTENANT. Could you--trust me sufficiently to let me tend the
jib?

ALLAN. [_Respectfully as before_] That would be too great an
honor for me, Lieutenant.

LIEUTENANT. Not at all, not at all! Do you think--the wind might
be good enough to-day--about dinner-time, say, for that's the
only time I am free?

ALLAN. [_Slyly_] It always calms down about dinner-time,
and--that's the time Miss Judith has her lesson.

LIEUTENANT. [_Sadly_] Oh, yes, yes! Hm! Do you think----

ALICE. Would one of you young gentlemen care to deliver a
letter for me? [ALLAN _and the_ LIEUTENANT _exchange glances of
mutual distrust_]--to Miss Judith? [ALLAN _and the_ LIEUTENANT
_jump up and hasten over to_ ALICE, _but not without a certain
dignity meant to disguise their emotion_] Both of you? Well, the
more safely my errand will be attended to. [_Hands the letter
to the_ LIEUTENANT] If you please, Lieutenant, I should like
to have that handkerchief. My daughter is very careful about
her things--there is a touch of pettiness in her nature--Give
me that handkerchief! I don't wish to laugh at you, but you
must not make yourself ridiculous--needlessly. And the Colonel
does not like to play the part of an Othello. [_Takes the
handkerchief_] Away with you now, young men, and try to hide
your feelings as much as you can.

      _The_ LIEUTENANT _bows and goes out, followed closely
      by_ ALLAN.

ALICE. [_Calls out_] Allan!

ALLAN. [_Stops unwillingly in the doorway_] Yes, Aunt.

ALICE. Stay here, unless you want to inflict more suffering on
yourself than you can bear.

ALLAN. But he is going!

ALICE. Let him burn himself. But take care of yourself.

ALLAN. I don't want to take care of myself.

ALICE. And then you cry afterward. And so I get the trouble of
consoling you.

ALLAN. I want to go!

ALICE. Go then! But come back here, young madcap, and I'll have
the right to laugh at you.

      [ALLAN _runs after the_ LIEUTENANT.

      [ALICE _writes again._

CURT. [_Enters_] Alice, I have received an anonymous letter that
is bothering me.

ALICE. Have you noticed that Edgar has become another person
since he put off the uniform? I could never have believed that a
coat might make such a difference.

CURT. You didn't answer my question.

ALICE. It was no question. It was a piece of information. What
do you fear?

CURT. Everything!

ALICE. He went to the city. And his trips to the city are always
followed by something dreadful.

CURT. But I can do nothing because I don't know from which
quarter the attack will begin.

ALICE. [_Folding the letter_] We'll see whether I have guessed
it.

CURT. Will you help me then?

ALICE. Yes--but no further than my own interests permit. My
own--that is my children's.

CURT. I understand that! Do you hear how silent everything
is--here on land, out on the sea, everywhere?

ALICE. But behind the silence I hear voices--mutterings, cries!

CURT. Hush! I hear something, too--no, it was only the gulls.

ALICE. But I hear something else! And now I am going to the
post-office--with this letter!

_Curtain_.



      _Same stage setting_. ALLAN _is sitting at the
      writing-table studying_. JUDITH _is standing in the
      doorway. She wears a tennis hat and carries the
      handle-bars of a bicycle in one hand_.


JUDITH. Can I borrow your wrench?

ALLAN. [_Without looking up_] No, you cannot.

JUDITH. You are discourteous now, because you think I am running
after you.

ALLAN. [_Without crossness_] I am nothing at all, but I ask
merely to be left alone.

JUDITH. [_Comes nearer_] Allan!

ALLAN. Yes, what is it?

JUDITH. You mustn't be angry with me!

ALLAN. I am not.

JUDITH. Will you give me your hand on that?

ALLAN. [_Kindly_] I don't want to shake hands with you, but I am
not angry--What do you want with me anyhow?

JUDITH. Oh, but you're stupid!

ALLAN. Well, let it go at that.

JUDITH. You think me cruel, and nothing else.

ALLAN. No, for I know that you are kind too--you _can_ be kind!

JUDITH. Well--how can I help--that you and the Lieutenant run
around and weep in the woods? Tell me, why do you weep? [ALLAN
_is embarrassed_] Tell me now--I never weep. And why have you
become such good friends? Of what do you talk while you are
walking about arm in arm? [ALLAN _cannot answer_] Allan, you'll
soon see what kind I am and whether I can strike a blow for one
I like. And I want to give you a piece of advice--although I
have no use for tale-bearing. Be prepared!

ALLAN. For what?

JUDITH. Trouble.

ALLAN. From what quarter?

JUDITH. From the quarter where you least expect it.

ALLAN. Well, I am rather used to disappointment, and life has
not brought me much that was pleasant What's in store now?

JUDITH. [_Pensively_] You poor boy--give me your hand! [ALLAN
_gives her his hand_] Look at me! Don't you dare to look at me?

      [ALLAN _rushes out to the left in order to hide his
      emotion_.

LIEUTENANT. [_In from the background_] I beg your pardon! I
thought that----

JUDITH. Tell me, Lieutenant, will you be my friend and ally?

LIEUTENANT. If you'll do me the honour----

JUDITH. Yes--a word only--don't desert Allan when disaster
overtakes him.

LIEUTENANT. What disaster?

JUDITH. You'll soon see--this very day perhaps. Do you like
Allan?

LIEUTENANT. The young man is my best pupil, and I value him
personally also on account of his strength of character--Yes,
life has moments when strength is required [_with emphasis_] to
bear up, to endure, to suffer, in a word!

JUDITH. That was more than one word, I should say. However, you
like Allan?

LIEUTENANT. Yes.

JUDITH. Look him up then, and keep him company.

LIEUTENANT. It was for that purpose I came here--for that and no
other. I had no other object in my visit.

JUDITH. I had not supposed anything of that kind--of the kind
you mean! Allan went that way.

      [_Pointing to the left_.

LIEUTENANT. [_Goes reluctantly to the left_] Yes--I'll do what
you ask.

JUDITH. Do, please.

ALICE. [_In from the background_] What are you doing here?

JUDITH. I wanted to borrow a wrench.

ALICE. Will you listen to me a moment?

JUDITH. Of course, I will.

      [ALICE _sits down on the sofa._

JUDITH. [_Remains standing_] But tell me quickly what you want
to say. I don't like long lectures.

ALICE. Lectures? Well, then--put up your hair and put on a long
dress.

JUDITH. Why?

ALICE. Because you are no longer a child. And you are young
enough to need no coquetry about your age.

JUDITH. What does that mean?

ALICE. That you have reached marriageable age. And your way of
dressing is causing scandal.

JUDITH. Then I shall do what you say.

ALICE. You have understood then?

JUDITH. Oh, yes.

ALICE. And we are agreed?

JUDITH. Perfectly.

ALICE. On all points?

JUDITH. Even the tenderest!

ALICE. Will you at the same time cease playing--with Allan?

JUDITH. It is going to be serious then?

ALICE. Yes.

JUDITH. Then we may just as well begin at once.

_She has already laid aside the handle-bars. Now she lets down
the bicycle skirt and twists her braid into a knot which she
fastens on top of her head with a hair-pin taken out of her
mother's hair_.

ALICE. It is not proper to make your toilet in a strange place.

JUDITH. Am I all right this way? Then I am ready. Come now who
dares!

ALICE. Now at last you look decent. And leave Allan in peace
after this.

JUDITH. I don't understand what you mean?

ALICE. Can't you see that he is suffering?

JUDITH. Yes, I think I have noticed it, but I don't know why. I
don't suffer!

ALICE. That is _your_ strength. But the day will come--oh,
yes, you shall know what it means. Go home now, and don't
forget--that you are wearing a long skirt.

JUDITH. Must you walk differently then?

ALICE. Just try.

JUDITH. [_Tries to walk like a lady_] Oh, my feet are tied; I am
caught, I cannot run any longer!

ALICE. Yes, child, now the walking begins, along the slow road
toward the unknown, which you know already, but must pretend to
ignore. Shorter steps, and much slower--much slower! The low
shoes of childhood must go, Judith, and you have to wear boots.
You don't remember when you laid aside baby socks and put on
shoes, but I do!

JUDITH. I can never stand this!

ALICE. And yet you must--must!

JUDITH. [_Goes over to her mother and kisses her lightly on the
cheek; then walks out with the dignified bearing of a lady, but
forgetting the handle-bars_] Good-bye then!

CURT. [_Enters from the right_] So you're already here?

ALICE. Yes.

CURT. Has _he_ come back?

ALICE. Yes.

CURT. How did he appear?

ALICE. In full dress--so he has called on the Colonel. And he
wore two orders.

CURT. Two? I knew he was to receive the Order of the Sword on
his retirement. But what can the other one be?

ALICE. I am not very familiar with those things, but there was a
white cross within a red one.

CURT. It is a Portuguese order then. Let me see--tell me, didn't
his articles in that periodical deal with quarantine stations in
Portuguese harbours?

ALICE. Yes, as far as I can recall.

CURT. And he has never been in Portugal?

ALICE. Never.

CURT. But I have been there.

ALICE. You shouldn't be so communicative. His ears and his
memory are so good.

CURT. Don't you think Judith may have helped him to this honour?

ALICE. Well, I declare! There are limits--[rising] and you have
passed them.

CURT. Are we to quarrel now?

ALICE. That depends on you. Don't meddle with my interests.

CURT. If they cross my own, I have to meddle with them, although
with a careful hand. Here he comes!

ALICE. And now it is going to happen.

CURT. What is--going to happen?

ALICE. We shall see!

CURT. Let it come to open attack then, for this state of siege
is getting on my nerves. I have not a friend left on the island.

ALICE. Wait a minute! You sit on this side--he must have the
easy-chair, of course--and then I can prompt you.

CAPTAIN. [_Enters from the background, in full dress uniform,
wearing the Order of the Sword and the Portuguese Order of
Christ_] Good day! Here's the meeting place.

ALICE. You are tired--sit down. [_The_ CAPTAIN, _contrary
to expectation, takes a seat on the sofa to the left_] Make
yourself comfortable.

CAPTAIN. This is all right. You're too kind.

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] Be careful--he's suspicious of us.

CAPTAIN. [_Crossly_] What was that you said?

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] He must have been drinking.

CAPTAIN. [_Rudely_] No-o, he has not. [_Silence_] Well--how have
you been amusing yourselves?

ALICE. And you?

CAPTAIN. Are you looking at my orders?

ALICE. No-o!

CAPTAIN. I guess not, because you are jealous--Other-wise it is
customary to offer congratulations to the recipient of honours.

ALICE. We congratulate you.

CAPTAIN. We get things like these instead of laurel wreaths,
such as they give to actresses.

ALICE. That's for the wreaths at home on the walls of the
tower----

CAPTAIN. Which your brother gave you----

ALICE. Oh, how you talk!

CAPTAIN. Before which I have had to bow down these twenty-five
years--and which it has taken me twenty-five years to expose.

ALICE. You have seen my brother?

CAPTAIN. Rather! [Alice _is crushed. Silence_] And you,
Curt--you don't say anything, do you?

CURT. I am waiting.

CAPTAIN. Well, I suppose you know the big news?

CURT. No.

CAPTAIN. It is not exactly agreeable for me to be the one who----

CURT. Oh, speak up!

CAPTAIN. The soda factory has gone to the wall----

CURT. That's decidedly unpleasant! Where does that leave you?

CAPTAIN. I am all right, as I sold out in time.

CURT. That was sensible.

CAPTAIN. But how about you?

CURT. Done for!

CAPTAIN. It's your own fault. You should have sold out in time,
or taken new stock.

CURT. So that I could lose that too.

CAPTAIN. No, for then the company would have been all right.

CURT. Not the company, but the directors, for in my mind that
new subscription was simply a collection for the benefit of the
board.

CAPTAIN. And now I ask whether such a view of the matter will
save your money?

CURT. No, I shall have to give up everything.

CAPTAIN. Everything?

CURT. Even my home, the furniture----

CAPTAIN. But that's dreadful!

CURT. I have experienced worse things. [_Silence_.

CAPTAIN. That's what happens when amateurs want to speculate.

CURT. You surprise me, for you know very well that if I
had not subscribed, I should have been boycotted. The
supplementary livelihood of the coast population, toilers
of the sea, inexhaustible capital, inexhaustible as the sea
itself--philanthropy and national prosperity--Thus you wrote and
printed--And now you speak of it as speculation!

CAPTAIN. [_Unmoved_] What are you going to do now?

CURT. Have an auction, I suppose.

CAPTAIN. You had better.

CURT. What do you mean?

CAPTAIN. What I said! For there [_slowly_] are going to be some
changes----

CURT. On the island?

CAPTAIN. Yes--as, for instance,--your quarters are going to be
exchanged for somewhat simpler ones.

CURT. Well, well.

CAPTAIN. Yes, the plan is to place the quarantine station on the
outside shore, near the water.

CURT. My original idea!

CAPTAIN. [_Dryly_] I don't know about that--for I am not
familiar with your ideas on the subject. However it seems then
quite natural that you dispose of the furniture, and it will
attract much less notice--the scandal!

CURT. What?

CAPTAIN. The scandal! [_Egging himself on_] For it is a scandal
to come to a new place and immediately get into financial
troubles which must result in a lot of annoyance to the
relatives--particularly to the relatives.

CURT. Oh, I guess I'll have to bear the worst of it.

CAPTAIN. I'll tell you one thing, my dear Curt: if I had not
stood by you in this matter, you would have lost your position.

CURT. That too?

CAPTAIN. It comes rather hard for you to keep things in
order--complaints have been made against your work.

CURT. Warranted complaints?

CAPTAIN. Yah! For you are--in spite of your other respectable
qualities--a careless fellow--Don't interrupt me! You are a very
careless fellow!

CURT. How strange!

CAPTAIN. However--the suggested change is going to take place
very soon. And I should advise you to hold the auction at once
or sell privately.

CURT. Privately? And where could I find a buyer in this place?

CAPTAIN. Well, I hope you don't expect me to settle down in the
midst of your things? That would make a fine story--[_staccato_]
hm!--especially when I--think of what happened--once upon a
time----

CURT. What was that? Are you referring to what did _not_ happen?

CAPTAIN. [_Turning about_] You are so silent, Alice? What is the
matter, old girl? Not blue, I hope?

ALICE. I sit here and think----

CAPTAIN. Goodness! Are you thinking? But you have to think
quickly, keenly, and correctly, if it is to be of any help! So
do your thinking now--one, two, three! Ha-ha! You can't! Well,
then, I must try--Where is Judith?

ALICE. Somewhere.

CAPTAIN. Where is Allan? [ALICE _remains silent_] Where is the
Lieutenant? [ALICE _as before_] I say, Curt--what are you going
to do with Allan now?

CURT. Do with him?

CAPTAIN. Yes, you cannot afford to keep him in the artillery now.

CURT. Perhaps not.

CAPTAIN. You had better get him into some cheap infantry
regiment--up in Norrland, or somewhere.

CURT. In Norrland?

CAPTAIN. Yes, or suppose you turned him into something practical
at once? If I were in your place, I should get him into
some business office--why not? [CURT _is silent_] In these
enlightened times--yah! Alice is so _uncommonly_ silent! Yes,
children, this is the seesawing seesaw board of life--one moment
high up, looking boldly around, and the next way down, and then
upward again, and so on--So much for that--[_To_ ALICE] Did you
say anything? [ALICE _shakes her head_] We may expect company
here in a few days.

ALICE. Were you speaking to me?

CAPTAIN. We may expect company in a few days--notable company!

ALICE. Who?

CAPTAIN. Behold--you're interested! Now you can sit there and
guess who is coming, and between guesses you may read this
letter over again. [_Hands her an opened letter_.

ALICE. My letter? Opened? Back from the mail?

CAPTAIN. [_Rising_] Yes, as the head of the family and your
guardian, I look after the sacred interests of the family, and
with iron hand I shall cut short every effort to break the
family ties by means of criminal correspondence. Yah! [ALICE
_is crushed_] I am not dead, you know, but don't take offence
now because I am going to raise us all out of undeserved
humility--undeserved on my own part, at least!

ALICE. Judith! Judith!

CAPTAIN. And Holofernes? I, perhaps? Pooh!

      [_Goes out through the background_.

CURT. Who is that man?

ALICE. How can I tell?

CURT. We are beaten.

ALICE. Yes--beyond a doubt.

CURT. He has stripped me of everything, but so cleverly that I
can accuse him of nothing.

ALICE. Why, no--you owe him a debt of gratitude instead!

CURT. Does he know what he is doing?

ALICE. No, I don't think so. He follows his nature and his
instincts, and just now he seems to be in favour where fortune
and misfortune are being meted out.

CURT. I suppose it's the Colonel who is to come here.

ALICE. Probably. And that is why Allan must go.

CURT. And you find that right?

ALICE. Yes.

CURT. Then our ways part.

ALICE. [_Ready to go_] A little--but we shall come together
again.

CURT. Probably.

ALICE. And do you know where?

CURT. Here.

ALICE. You guess it?

CURT. That's easy! He takes the house and buys the furniture.

ALICE. I think so, too. But don't desert me!

CURT. Not for a little thing like that.

ALICE. Good-bye. [_Goes_.

CURT. Good-bye.

_Curtain_.



      _Same stage setting, but the day is cloudy and it is
      raining outside_.

      ALICE _and_ CURT _enter from the background, wearing
      rain coats and carrying umbrellas_.


ALICE. At last I have got you to come here! But, I cannot be so
cruel as to wish you welcome to your own home----

CURT. Oh, why not? I have passed through three forced sales--and
worse than that--It doesn't matter to me.

ALICE. Did he call you?

CURT. It was a formal command, but on what basis I don't
understand.

ALICE. Why, he is not your superior!

CURT. No, but he has made himself king of the island. And if
there be any resistance, he has only to mention the Colonel's
name, and everybody submits. Tell me, is it to-day the Colonel
is coming?

ALICE. He is expected--but I know nothing with certainty--Sit
down, please.

CURT. [_Sitting down_] Nothing has been changed here.

ALICE. Don't think of it! Don't renew the pain!

CURT. The pain? I find it merely a little strange. Strange as
the man himself. Do you know, when I made his acquaintance as
a boy, I fled him. But he was after me. Flattered, offered
services, and surrounded me with ties--I repeated my attempt at
escape, but in vain--And now I am his slave!

ALICE. And why? He owes you a debt, but you appear as the debtor.

CURT. Since I lost all I had, he has offered me help in getting
Allan through his examinations----

ALICE. For which you will have to pay dearly! You are still a
candidate for the Riksdag?

CURT. Yes, and, so far as I can see, there is nothing in my way.
[_Silence_.

ALICE. Is Allan really going to leave to-day?

CURT. Yes, if I cannot prevent it.

ALICE. That was a short-lived happiness.

CURT. Short-lived as everything but life itself, which lasts all
too long.

ALICE. Too long, indeed!--Won't you come in and wait in the
sitting-room? Even if it does not trouble you, it troubles
me--these surroundings!

CURT. If you wish it----

ALICE. I feel ashamed, so ashamed that I could wish to die--but
I can alter nothing!

CURT. Let us go then--as you wish it.

ALICE. And somebody is coming too.

      [_They go out to the left_.

      _The_ CAPTAIN _and_ ALLAN _enter from the background,
      both in uniform and wearing cloaks_.

CAPTAIN. Sit down, my boy, and let me have a talk with you.
[_Sits down in the easy-chair_.

      [Allan _sits down on the chair to the left_.

CAPTAIN. It's raining to-day--otherwise I could sit here
comfortably and look at the sea. [_Silence_] Well?--You don't
like to go, do you?

ALLAN. I don't like to leave my father.

CAPTAIN. Yes, your father--he is rather an unfortunate man.
[_Silence_] And parents rarely understand the true welfare of
their children. That is to say--there are exceptions, of course.
Hm! Tell me, Allan, have you any communication with your mother?

ALLAN. Yes, she writes now and then----

CAPTAIN. Do you know that she is your guardian?

ALLAN. Yes.

CAPTAIN. Now, Allan, do you know that your mother has authorised
me to act in her place?

ALLAN. I didn't know that!

CAPTAIN. Well, you know it now. And, therefore, all discussions
concerning your career are done with--And you are going to
Norrland.

ALLAN. But I have no money.

CAPTAIN. I have arranged for what you need.

ALLAN. All I can do then is to thank you, Uncle.

CAPTAIN. Yes, _you_ are grateful--which everybody is not.
Hm!--[_Raising his voice_] The Colonel--do you know the Colonel?

ALLAN. [_Embarrassed_] No, I don't.

CAPTAIN. [_With emphasis_] The Colonel--is my special
friend--[_a little more hurriedly_] as you know, perhaps. Hm!
The Colonel has wished to show his interest in my family,
including my wife's relatives. Through his intercession, the
Colonel has been able to provide the means needed for the
completion of your course. Now you understand the obligation
under which you and your father are placed toward the Colonel.
Have I spoken with sufficient plainness? [ALLAN _bows_] Go and
pack your things now. The money will be handed to you at the
landing. And now good-bye, my boy. [_Holds out a finger to_
ALLAN] Good-bye then.

      [_Rises and goes out to the right_.

      [ALLAN, _alone, stands still, looking sadly around
      the room_.

JUDITH. [_Enters from the background, wearing a hooded rain coat
and carrying an umbrella; otherwise exquisitely dressed, in long
skirt and with her hair put up_] Is that you, Allan!

ALLAN. [_Turning around, surveys_ JUDITH _carefully_] Is that
you, Judith?

JUDITH. You don't know me any longer? Where have you been all
this time? What are you looking at? My long dress--and my
hair--You have not seen me like this before?

ALLAN. No-o----

JUDITH. Do I look like a married woman?

      [ALLAN _turns away from her_.

JUDITH. [_Earnestly_] What are you doing here?

ALLAN. I am saying good-bye.

JUDITH. What? You are going--away?

ALLAN. I am transferred to Norrland.

JUDITH. [_Dumfounded_] To Norrland? When are you going?

ALLAN. To-day.

JUDITH. Whose doing is this?

ALLAN. Your father's.

JUDITH. That's what I thought! [_Walks up and down the floor,
stamping her feet_] I wish you had stayed over to-day.

ALLAN. In order to meet the Colonel?

JUDITH. What do you know about the Colonel?--Is it certain that
you are going?

ALLAN. There is no other choice. And now I want it myself.
[_Silence_.

JUDITH. Why do you want it now?

ALLAN. I want to get away from here--out into the world!

JUDITH. It's too close here? Yes, Allan, I understand you--it's
unbearable here--here, where they speculate--in soda and human
beings! [Silence.

JUDITH. [_With genuine emotion_] As you know, Allan, I possess
that fortunate nature which cannot suffer--but--now I am
learning!

ALLAN. You?

JUDITH. Yes--now it's beginning! [_She presses both hands to her
breast_] Oh, how it hurts--oh!

ALLAN. What is it?

JUDITH. I don't know--I choke--I think I'm going to die!

ALLAN. Judith?

JUDITH. [_Crying out_] Oh! Is this the way it feels? Is this the
way--poor boys!

ALLAN. I should smile, if I were as cruel as you are.

JUDITH. I am not cruel, but I didn't know better--You must not
go!

ALLAN. I have to!

JUDITH. Go then--but give me a keepsake!

ALLAN. What have I to give you?

JUDITH. [_With all the seriousness of deepest suffering_]
You!--No, I can never live through this! [_Cries out, pressing
her breast with both hands_] I suffer, I suffer--What have
you done to me? I don't want to live any longer! Allan, don't
go--not alone! Let us go together--we'll take the small
boat, the little white one--and we'll sail far out, with the
main sheet made fast--the wind is high--and we sail till we
founder out there, way out, where there is no eelgrass and no
jelly-fish--What do you say?--But we should have washed the
sails yesterday--they should be white as snow--for I want to see
white in that moment--and you swim with your arm about me until
you grow tired--and then we sink--[_Turning around_] There would
be style in that, a good deal more style than in going about
here lamenting and smuggling letters that will be opened and
jeered at by father--Allan! [_She takes hold of both his arms
and shakes him_] Do you hear?

ALLAN. [_Who has been watching her with shining eyes_] Judith!
Judith! Why were you not like this before?

JUDITH. I didn't know--how could I tell what I didn't know?

ALLAN. And now I must go away from you! But I suppose it is the
better, the only thing! I cannot compete with a man--like----

JUDITH. Don't speak of the Colonel!

ALLAN. Is it not true?

JUDITH. It is true--and it is not true.

ALLAN. Can it become wholly untrue?

JUDITH. Yes, so it shall--within an hour!

ALLAN. And you keep your word? I can wait, I can suffer, I can
work--Judith!

JUDITH. Don't go yet! How long must I wait?

ALLAN. A year.

JUDITH. [_Exultantly_] One? I shall wait a thousand years,
and if you do not come then, I shall turn the dome of heaven
upside down and make the sun rise in the west--Hush, somebody
is coming! Allan, we must part--take me into your arms! [_They
embrace each other_] But you must not kiss me. [_Turns her head
away_] There, go now! Go now!

      ALLAN _goes toward the background and puts on his
      cloak. Then they rush into each other's arms so
      that_ JUDITH _disappears beneath the cloak, and for
      a moment they exchange kisses_. ALLAN _rushes out_.
      JUDITH _throws herself face downward on the sofa and
      sobs_.

ALLAN. [_Comes back and kneels beside the sofa_] No, I cannot
go! I cannot go away from you--not now!

JUDITH. [_Rising_] If you could only see how beautiful you are
now! If you could only see yourself!

ALLAN. Oh, no, a man cannot be beautiful. But you, Judith!
You--that you--oh, I saw that, when you were kind, another
Judith appeared--and she's mine!--But if you don't keep faith
with me now, then I shall die!

JUDITH. I think I am dying even now--Oh, that I might die now,
just now, when I am so happy----

ALLAN. Somebody is coming!

JUDITH. Let them come! I fear nothing in the world hereafter.
But I wish you could take me along under your cloak. [_She
hides herself in play under his cloak_] And then I should fly
with you to Norrland. What are we to do in Norrland? Become a
Fusilier--one of those that wear plumes on their hats? There's
style in that, and it will be becoming to you.

      [_Plays with his hair._

      ALLAN _kisses the tips of her fingers, one by
      one--and then he kisses her shoe_.

JUDITH. What are you doing, Mr. Madcap? Your lips will get
black. [_Rising impetuously_] And then I cannot kiss you when
you go! Come, and I'll go with you!

ALLAN. No, then I should be placed under arrest.

JUDITH. I'll go with you to the guard-room.

ALLAN. They wouldn't let you! We must part now!

JUDITH. I am going to swim after the steamer--and then you jump
in and save me--and it gets into the newspapers, and we become
engaged. Shall we do that?

ALLAN. You can still jest?

JUDITH. There will always be time for tears--Say good-bye
now!----

      _They rush into each other's arms; then_ ALLAN
      _withdraws slowly through the door in the
      background,_ JUDITH _following him; the door remains
      open after them; they embrace again outside, in the
      rain_.

ALLAN. You'll get wet, Judith.

JUDITH. What do I care!

      _They tear themselves away from each other_. ALLAN
      _leaves_. JUDITH _remains behind, exposing herself to
      the rain and to the wind, which strains at her hair
      and her clothes while she is waving her handkerchief.
      Then_ JUDITH _runs back into the room and throws
      herself on the sofa, with her face buried in her
      hands_.

ALICE. [_Enters and goes over to_ JUDITH] What is this?--Get up
and let me look at you.

      [JUDITH _sits up_.

ALICE. [_Scrutinising her_] You are not sick--And I am not going
to console you. [_Goes out to the right_.

      _The_ LIEUTENANT _enters from the background_.

JUDITH. [_Gets up and puts on the hooded coat_] Come along to
the telegraph office, Lieutenant.

LIEUTENANT. If I can be of any service--but I don't think it's
quite proper----

JUDITH. So much the better! I want you to compromise me--but
without any illusions on your part--Go ahead, please! [_They go
out through the background_.

      _The_ CAPTAIN _and_ ALICE _enter from the right; he
      is in undress uniform_.

CAPTAIN. [_Sits down in the easy-chair_] Let him come in.

      ALICE _goes over to the door on the left and opens
      it, whereupon she sits down on the sofa_.

CURT. [_Enters from the left_] You want to speak to me?

CAPTAIN. [_Pleasantly, but somewhat condescendingly_] Yes, I
have quite a number of important things to tell you. Sit down.

CURT. [_Sits down on the chair to the left_] I am all ears.

CAPTAIN. Well, then!--[_Bumptiously_] You know that our
quarantine system has been neglected during nearly a century--hm!

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] That's the candidate for the Riksdag who
speaks now.

CAPTAIN. But with the tremendous development witnessed by our
own day in----

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] The communications, of course!

CAPTAIN.--all kinds of ways the government has begun to
consider improvements. And for this purpose the Board of Health
has appointed inspectors--hm!

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] He's giving dictation.

CAPTAIN. You may as well learn it now as later--I have been
appointed an inspector of quarantines. [_Silence_.

CURT. I congratulate--and pay my respects to my superior at the
same time.

CAPTAIN. On account of ties of kinship our personal relations
will remain unchanged. However--to speak of other things--At
my request your son Allan has been transferred to an infantry
regiment in Norrland.

CURT. But I don't want it.

CAPTAIN. Your will in this case is subordinate to the mother's
wishes--and as the mother has authorised me to decide, I have
formed this decision.

CURT. I admire you!

CAPTAIN. Is that the only feeling you experience at this moment
when you are to part from your son? Have you no other purely
human feelings?

CURT. You mean that I ought to be suffering?

CAPTAIN. Yes.

CURT. It would please you if I suffered. You wish me to suffer.

CAPTAIN. _You_ suffer?--Once I was taken sick--you were present
and I can still remember that your face expressed nothing but
undisguised pleasure.

ALICE. That is not true! Curt sat beside your bed all night
and calmed you down when your qualms of conscience became too
violent--but when you recovered you ceased to be thankful for
it----

CAPTAIN. [_Pretending not to hear_ Alice] Consequently Allan
will have to leave us.

CURT. And who is going to pay for it?

CAPTAIN. I have done so already--that is to say, we--a syndicate
of people interested in the young man's future.

CURT. A syndicate?

CAPTAIN. Yes--and to make sure that everything is all right you
can look over these subscription lists.

      [_Hands him some papers_.

CURT. Lists? [_Reading the papers_] These are begging letters?

CAPTAIN. Call them what you please.

CURT. Have you gone begging on behalf of my son?

CAPTAIN. Are you ungrateful again? An ungrateful man is the
heaviest burden borne by the earth.

CURT. Then I am dead socially! And my candidacy is done for!

CAPTAIN. What candidacy?

CURT. For the Riksdag, of course.

CAPTAIN. I hope you never had any such notions--particularly as
you might have guessed that I, as an older resident, intended to
offer my own services, which you seem to underestimate.

CURT. Oh, well, then that's gone, too!

CAPTAIN. It doesn't seem to trouble you very much.

CURT. Now you have taken everything--do you want more?

CAPTAIN. Have you anything more? And have you anything to
reproach me with? Consider carefully if you have anything to
reproach me with.

CURT. Strictly speaking, no! Everything has been correct and
legal as it should be between honest citizens in the course of
daily life----

CAPTAIN. You say this with a resignation which I would call
cynical. But your entire nature has a cynical bent, my dear
Curt, and there are moments when I feel tempted to share
Alice's opinion of you--that you are a hypocrite, a hypocrite of
the first water.

CURT. [_Calmly_] So that's Alice's opinion?

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] It was--once. But not now, for it takes true
heroism to bear what you have borne--or it takes something else!

CAPTAIN. Now I think the discussion may be regarded as closed.
You, Curt, had better go and say good-bye to Allan, who is
leaving with the next boat.

CURT. [_Rising_] So soon? Well, I have gone through worse things
than that.

CAPTAIN. You say that so often that I am beginning to wonder
what you went through in America?

CURT. What I went through? I went through misfortunes. And it is
the unmistakable right of every human being to suffer misfortune.

CAPTAIN. [_Sharply_] There are self-inflicted misfortunes--were
yours of that kind?

CURT. Is not this a question of conscience?

CAPTAIN. [_Brusquely_] Do you mean to say you have a conscience?

CURT. There are wolves and there are sheep, and no human being
is honoured by being a sheep. But I'd rather be that than a wolf!

CAPTAIN. You don't recognise the old truth, that everybody is
the maker of his own fortune?

CURT. Is _that_ a truth?

CAPTAIN. And you don't know that a man's own strength----

CURT. Yes, I know that from the night when your own strength
failed you, and you lay flat on the floor.

CAPTAIN. [_Raising his voice_] A deserving man like myself
--yes, look at me--For fifty years I have fought--against
a world--but at last I have won the game, by perseverance,
loyalty, energy, and--integrity!

ALICE. You should leave that to be said by others!

CAPTAIN. The others won't say it because they are jealous.
However--we are expecting company--my daughter Judith will
to-day meet her intended--Where is Judith?

ALICE. She is out.

CAPTAIN. In the rain? Send for her.

CURT. Perhaps I may go now?

CAPTAIN. No, you had better stay. Is Judith dressed--Properly?

ALICE. Oh, so-so--Have you definite word from the Colonel that
he is coming?

CAPTAIN. [_Rising_] Yes--that is to say, he will take us by
surprise, as it is termed. And I am expecting a telegram from
him--any moment. [_Goes to the right_] I'll be back at once.

ALICE. There you see him as he is! Can he be called human?

CURT. When you asked that question once before, I answered no.
Now I believe him to be the commonest kind of human being of the
sort that possess the earth. Perhaps we, too, are of the same
kind--making use of other people and of favourable opportunities?

ALICE. He has eaten you and yours alive--and you defend him?

CURT. I have suffered worse things. And this man-eater has left
my soul unharmed--_that_ he couldn't swallow!

ALICE. What "worse" have you suffered?

CURT. And _you_ ask that?

ALICE. Do you wish to be rude?

CURT. No, I don't wish to--and therefore--don't ask again!

CAPTAIN. [_Enters from the right_] The telegram was already
there, however--Please read it, Alice, for I cannot see--[_Seats
himself pompously in the easy-chair_] Read it! You need not go,
Curt.

      ALICE _glances through the telegram quickly and looks
      perplexed_.

CAPTAIN. Well? Don't you find it pleasing?

      [ALICE _stares in silence at the_ CAPTAIN.

CAPTAIN. [_Ironically_] Who is it from?

ALICE. From the Colonel.

CAPTAIN. [_With self-satisfaction_] So I thought--and what does
the Colonel say?

ALICE. This is what he says: "On account of Miss Judith's
impertinent communication over the telephone, I consider the
relationship ended--for ever!"

      [_Looks intently at the_ CAPTAIN.

CAPTAIN. Once more, if you please.

ALICE. [_Reads rapidly_] "On account of Miss Judith's
impertinent communication over the telephone, I consider the
relationship ended--for ever!"

CAPTAIN. [_Turns pale_] It is Judith!

ALICE. And there is Holofernes!

CAPTAIN. And what are you?

ALICE. Soon you will see!

CAPTAIN. This is your doing!

ALICE. No!

CAPTAIN. [_In a rage_] This is your doing!

ALICE. No! [_The_ Captain _tries to rise and draw his sabre, but
falls back, touched by an apoplectic stroke_] There you got what
was coming to you!

CAPTAIN. [_With senile tears in his voice_] Don't be angry at
me--I am very sick----

ALICE. Are you? I am glad to hear it.

CURT. Let us put him to bed.

ALICE. No, I don't want to touch him. [_Rings_.

CAPTAIN. [_As before_] You must not be angry at me! [_To_ CURT]
Look after my children!

CURT. This is sublime! I am to look after his children, and he
has stolen mine!

ALICE. Always the same self-deception!

CAPTAIN. Look after my children! [_Continues to mumble
unintelligibly_] Blub-blub-blub-blub.

ALICE. At last that tongue is checked! Can brag no more, lie no
more, wound no more! You, Curt, who believe in God, give Him
thanks on my behalf. Thank Him for my liberation from the tower,
from the wolf, from the vampire!

CURT. Not that way, Alice!

ALICE. [_With her face close to the_ CAPTAIN's] Where is your
own strength now? Tell me? Where is your energy? [_The_ CAPTAIN,
_speechless, spits in her face_] Oh, you can still squirt venom,
you viper--then I'll tear the tongue out of your throat! [_Cuffs
him on the ear_] The head is off, but still it blushes!--O,
Judith, glorious girl, whom I have carried like vengeance under
my heart--you, you have set us free, all of us!--? If you have
more heads than one, Hydra, we'll take them! [_Pulls his beard_]
Think only that justice exists on the earth! Sometimes I dreamed
it, but I could never believe it. Curt, ask God to pardon me for
misjudging Him. Oh, there is justice! So I will become a sheep,
too! Tell Him that, Curt! A little success makes us better, but
adversity alone turns us into wolves.

      _The_ LIEUTENANT _enters from the background_.

ALICE. The Captain has had a stroke--will you please help us to
roll out the chair?

LIEUTENANT. Madam----

ALICE. What is it?

LIEUTENANT. Well, Miss Judith----

ALICE. Help us with this first--then you can speak of Miss
Judith afterward.

      [_The_ LIEUTENANT _rolls out the chair to the right_.

ALICE. Away with the carcass! Out with it, and let's open
the doors! The place must be aired! [_Opens the doors in the
background; the sky has cleared_] Ugh!

CURT. Are you going to desert him?

ALICE. A wrecked ship is deserted, and the crew save their
lives--I'll not act as undertaker to a rotting beast! Drainmen
and dissectors may dispose of him! A garden bed would be too
good for that barrowful of filth! Now I am going to wash and
bathe myself in order to get rid of all this impurity--if I can
ever cleanse myself completely!

      JUDITH _is seen outside, by the balustrade, waving
      her handkerchief toward the sea_.

CURT. [_Toward the background_] Who is there? Judith! [_Calls
out_] Judith!

JUDITH.[_Cries out as she enters_] He is gone!

CURT. Who?

JUDITH. Allan is gone!

CURT. Without saying good-bye?

JUDITH. He did to me, and he sent his love to you, Uncle.

ALICE. Oh, that was it!

JUDITH. [_Throwing herself into_ CURT's _arms_] He is gone!

CURT. He will come back, little girl.

ALICE. Or we will go after him!

CURT. [_With a gesture indicating the door on the right_] And
leave him? What would the world----

ALICE. The world--bah! Judith, come into my arms! [JUDITH _goes
up to_ ALICE, _who kisses her on the forehead_] Do you want to
go after him?

JUDITH. How can you ask?

ALICE. But your father is sick.

JUDITH. What do I care!

ALICE. This is Judith! Oh, I love you, Judith!

JUDITH. And besides, papa is never mean--and he doesn't like
cuddling. There's style to papa, after all.

ALICE. Yes, in a way!

JUDITH. And I don't think he is longing for me after that
telephone message--Well, why should he pester me with an old
fellow? No, Allan, Allan! [_Throws herself into_ CURT's _arms_]
I want to go to Allan!

      _Tears herself loose again and runs out to wave her
      handkerchief_

      [CURT _follows her and waves his handkerchief also_.

ALICE. Think of it, that flowers can grow out of dirt!

      _The_ LIEUTENANT _in from the right_.

ALICE. Well?

LIEUTENANT. Yes, Miss Judith----

ALICE. Is the feeling of those letters that form her name so
sweet on your lips that it makes you forget him who is dying?

LIEUTENANT. Yes, but she said----

ALICE. She? Say rather Judith then! But first of all--how goes
it in there?

LIEUTENANT. Oh, in there--it's all over!

ALICE. All over? O, God, on my own behalf and that of all
mankind, I thank Thee for having freed us from this evil!
Your arm, if you please--I want to go outside and get a
breath--breathe!

      [_The_ LIEUTENANT _offers his arm_.

ALICE. [_Checks herself_] Did he say anything before the end
came?

LIEUTENANT. Miss Judith's father spoke a few words only.

ALICE. What did he say?

LIEUTENANT. He said: "Forgive them, for they know not what they
do!"

ALICE. Inconceivable!

LIEUTENANT. Yes, Miss Judith's father was a good and noble man.

ALICE. Curt!

      CURT _Enters_.

ALICE. It is over!

CURT. Oh!

ALICE. Do you know what his last words were? No, you can never
guess it. "Forgive them, for they know not what they do!"

CURT. Can you translate it?

ALICE. I suppose he meant that he had always done right and died
as one that had been wronged by life.

CURT. I am sure his funeral sermon will be fine.

ALICE. And plenty of flowers--from the non-commissioned officers.

CURT. Yes.

ALICE. About a year ago he said something like this: "It looks
to me as if life were a tremendous hoax played on all of us!"

CURT. Do you mean to imply that he was playing a hoax on us up
to the very moment of death?

ALICE. No--but now, when he is dead, I feel a strange
inclination to speak well of him.

CURT. Well, let us do so!

LIEUTENANT. Miss Judith's father was a good and noble man.

ALICE. [_To_ CURT] Listen to that!

CURT. "They know not what they do." How many times did I not ask
you whether he knew what he was doing? And you didn't think he
knew. Therefore, forgive him!

ALICE. Riddles! Riddles! But do you notice that there is peace
in the house now? The wonderful peace of death. Wonderful as the
solemn anxiety that surrounds the coming of a child into the
world. I hear the silence--and on the floor I see the traces of
the easy-chair that carried him away--And I feel that now my own
life is ended, and I am starting on the road to dissolution!
Do you know, it's queer, but those simple words of the
Lieutenant--and his is a simple mind--they pursue me, but now
they have become serious. My husband, my youth's beloved--yes,
perhaps you laugh!--he _was_ a good and noble man--nevertheless!

CURT. Nevertheless? And a brave one--as he fought for his own
and his family's existence!

ALICE. What worries! What humiliations! Which he wiped out--in
order to pass on!

CURT. He was one who had been passed by! And that is to say
much! Alice, go in there!

ALICE. No, I cannot do it! For while we have been talking here,
the image of him as he was in his younger years has come back
to me--I have seen him, I see him--now, as when he was only
twenty--I must have loved that man!

CURT. And hated him!

ALICE. And hated!--Peace be with him!

      _Goes toward the right door and stops in front of it,
      folding her hands as if to pray_.


_Curtain_.

THERE ARE CRIMES AND CRIMES
A COMEDY
1899


CHARACTERS

MAURICE, a playwright
JEANNE, his mistress
MARION, their daughter, five years old
ADOLPHE, a painter
HENRIETTE, his mistress
EMILE, a workman, brother of Jeanne
MADAME CATHERINE
THE ABBÉ
A WATCHMAN
A HEAD WAITER
A COMMISSAIRE
TWO DETECTIVES
A WAITER
A GUARD
SERVANT GIRL



ACT I, SCENE 1. THE CEMETERY
             2. THE CRÊMERIE

ACT II, SCENE 1. THE AUBERGE DES ADRETS
              2. THE BOIS DE BOULOGNE

ACT III, SCENE 1. THE CRÊMERIE
               2. THE AUBERGE DES ADRETS

ACT IV, SCENE 1. THE LUXEMBOURG GARDENS
              2. THE CRÊMERIE

(All the scenes are laid in Paris)


THERE ARE CRIMES AND CRIMES


ACT I FIRST SCENE

(The upper avenue of cypresses in the Montparnasse Cemetery at
Paris. The background shows mortuary chapels, stone crosses on
which are inscribed "O Crux! Ave Spes Unica!" and the ruins of a
wind-mill covered with ivy.)

(A well-dressed woman in widow's weeds is kneeling and muttering
prayers in front of a grave decorated with flowers.)

(JEANNE is walking back and forth as if expecting somebody.)

(MARION is playing with some withered flowers picked from a
rubbish heap on the ground.)

(The ABBÉ is reading his breviary while walking along the further
end of the avenue.)

WATCHMAN. [Enters and goes up to JEANNE] Look here, this is no
playground.

JEANNE. [Submissively] I am only waiting for somebody who'll soon
be here--

WATCHMAN. All right, but you're not allowed to pick any flowers.

JEANNE. [To MARION] Drop the flowers, dear.

ABBÉ. [Comes forward and is saluted by the WATCHMAN] Can't the
child play with the flowers that have been thrown away?

WATCHMAN. The regulations don't permit anybody to touch even the
flowers that have been thrown away, because it's believed they may
spread infection--which I don't know if it's true.

ABBÉ. [To MARION] In that case we have to obey, of course. What's
your name, my little girl?

MARION. My name is Marion.

ABBÉ. And who is your father?

(MARION begins to bite one of her fingers and does not answer.)

ABBÉ. Pardon my question, madame. I had no intention--I was just
talking to keep the little one quiet.

(The WATCHMAN has gone out.)

JEANNE. I understood it, Reverend Father, and I wish you would say
something to quiet me also. I feel very much disturbed after
having waited here two hours.

ABBÉ. Two hours--for him! How these human beings torture each
other! O Crux! Ave spes unica!

JEANNE. What do they mean, those words you read all around here?

ABBÉ. They mean: O cross, our only hope!

JEANNE. Is it the only one?

ABBÉ. The only certain one.

JEANNE. I shall soon believe that you are right, Father.

ABBÉ. May I ask why?

JEANNE. You have already guessed it. When he lets the woman and
the child wait two hours in a cemetery, then the end is not far
off.

ABBÉ. And when he has left you, what then?

JEANNE. Then we have to go into the river.

ABBÉ. Oh, no, no!

JEANNE. Yes, yes!

MARION. Mamma, I want to go home, for I am hungry.

JEANNE. Just a little longer, dear, and we'll go home.

ABBÉ. Woe unto those who call evil good and good evil.

JEANNE. What is that woman doing at the grave over there?

ABBÉ. She seems to be talking to the dead.

JEANNE. But you cannot do that?

ABBÉ. She seems to know how.

JEANNE. This would mean that the end of life is not the end of our
misery?

ABBÉ. And you don't know it?

JEANNE. Where can I find out?

ABBÉ. Hm! The next time you feel as if you wanted to learn about
this well-known matter, you can look me up in Our Lady's Chapel at
the Church of St. Germain--Here comes the one you are waiting for,
I guess.

JEANNE. [Embarrassed] No, he is not the one, but I know him.

ABBÉ. [To MARION] Good-bye, little Marion! May God take care of
you! [Kisses the child and goes out] At St. Germain des Prés.

EMILE. [Enters] Good morning, sister. What are you doing here?

JEANNE. I am waiting for Maurice.

EMILE. Then I guess you'll have a lot of waiting to do, for I saw
him on the boulevard an hour ago, taking breakfast with some
friends. [Kissing the child] Good morning, Marion.

JEANNE. Ladies also?

EMILE. Of course. But that doesn't mean anything. He writes plays,
and his latest one has its first performance tonight. I suppose he
had with him some of the actresses.

JEANNE. Did he recognise you?

EMILE. No, he doesn't know who I am, and it is just as well. I
know my place as a workman, and I don't care for any condescension
from those that are above me.

JEANNE. But if he leaves us without anything to live on?

EMILE. Well, you see, when it gets that far, then I suppose I
shall have to introduce myself. But you don't expect anything of
the kind, do you--seeing that he is fond of you and very much
attached to the child?

JEANNE. I don't know, but I have a feeling that something dreadful
is in store for me.

EMILE. Has he promised to marry you?

JEANNE. No, not promised exactly, but he has held out hopes.

EMILE. Hopes, yes! Do you remember my words at the start: don't
hope for anything, for those above us don't marry downward.

JEANNE. But such things have happened.

EMILE. Yes, they have happened. But, would you feel at home in his
world? I can't believe it, for you wouldn't even understand what
they were talking of. Now and then I take my meals where he is
eating--out in the kitchen is my place, of course--and I don't
make out a word of what they say.

JEANNE. So you take your meals at that place?

EMILE. Yes, in the kitchen.

JEANNE. And think of it, he has never asked me to come with him.

EMILE. Well, that's rather to his credit, and it shows he has some
respect for the mother of his child. The women over there are a
queer lot.

JEANNE. Is that so?

EMILE. But Maurice never pays any attention to the women. There is
something _square_ about that fellow.

JEANNE. That's what I feel about him, too, but as soon as there is
a woman in it, a man isn't himself any longer.

EMILE. [Smiling] You don't tell me! But listen: are you hard up
for money?

JEANNE. No, nothing of that kind.

EMILE. Well, then the worst hasn't come yet--Look! Over there!
There he comes. And I'll leave you. Good-bye, little girl.

JEANNE. Is he coming? Yes, that's him.

EMILE. Don't make him mad now--with your jealousy, Jeanne! [Goes
out.]

JEANNE. No, I won't.

(MAURICE enters.)

MARION. [Runs up to him and is lifted up into his arms] Papa,
papa!

MAURICE. My little girl! [Greets JEANNE] Can you forgive me,
Jeanne, that I have kept you waiting so long?

JEANNE. Of course I can.

MAURICE. But say it in such a way that I can hear that you are
forgiving me.

JEANNE. Come here and let me whisper it to you.

(MAURICE goes up close to her.)

(JEANNE kisses him on the cheek.)

MAURICE. I didn't hear.

(JEANNE kisses him on the mouth.)

MAURICE. Now I heard! Well--you know, I suppose that this is the
day that will settle my fate? My play is on for tonight, and there
is every chance that it will succeed--or fail.

JEANNE. I'll make sure of success by praying for you.

MAURICE. Thank you. If it doesn't help, it can at least do no
harm--Look over there, down there in the valley, where the haze is
thickest: there lies Paris. Today Paris doesn't know who Maurice
is, but it is going to know within twenty-four hours. The haze,
which has kept me obscured for thirty years, will vanish before my
breath, and I shall become visible, I shall assume definite shape
and begin to be somebody. My enemies--which means all who would
like to do what I have done--will be writhing in pains that shall
be my pleasures, for they will be suffering all that I have
suffered.

JEANNE. Don't talk that way, don't!

MAURICE. But that's the way it is.

JEANNE. Yes, but don't speak of it--And then?

MAURICE. Then we are on firm ground, and then you and Marion will
bear the name I have made famous.

JEANNE. You love me then?

MAURICE. I love both of you, equally much, or perhaps Marion a
little more.

JEANNE. I am glad of it, for you can grow tired of me, but not of
her.

MAURICE. Have you no confidence in my feelings toward you?

JEANNE. I don't know, but I am afraid of something, afraid of
something terrible--

MAURICE. You are tired out and depressed by your long wait, which
once more I ask you to forgive. What have you to be afraid of?

JEANNE. The unexpected: that which you may foresee without having
any particular reason to do so.

MAURICE. But I foresee only success, and I have particular reasons
for doing so: the keen instincts of the management and their
knowledge of the public, not to speak of their personal
acquaintance with the critics. So now you must be in good spirits--

JEANNE. I can't, I can't! Do you know, there was an Abbé here a
while ago, who talked so beautifully to us. My faith--which you
haven't destroyed, but just covered up, as when you put chalk on a
window to clean it--I couldn't lay hold on it for that reason, but
this old man just passed his hand over the chalk, and the light
came through, and it was possible again to see that the people
within were at home--To-night I will pray for you at St. Germain.

MAURICE. Now I am getting scared.

JEANNE. Fear of God is the beginning of wisdom.

MAURICE. God? What is that? Who is he?

JEANNE. It was he who gave joy to your youth and strength to your
manhood. And it is he who will carry us through the terrors that
lie ahead of us.

MAURICE. What is lying ahead of us? What do you know? Where have
you learned of this? This thing that I don't know?

JEANNE. I can't tell. I have dreamt nothing, seen nothing, heard
nothing. But during these two dreadful hours I have experienced
such an infinity of pain that I am ready for the worst.

MARION. Now I want to go home, mamma, for I am hungry.

MAURICE. Yes, you'll go home now, my little darling. [Takes her
into his arms.]

MARION. [Shrinking] Oh, you hurt me, papa!

JEANNE. Yes, we must get home for dinner. Good-bye then, Maurice.
And good luck to you!

MAURICE. [To MARION] How did I hurt you? Doesn't my little girl
know that I always want to be nice to her?

MARION. If you are nice, you'll come home with us.

MAURICE. [To JEANNE] When I hear the child talk like that, you
know, I feel as if I ought to do what she says. But then reason
and duty protest--Good-bye, my dear little girl! [He kisses the
child, who puts her arms around his neck.]

JEANNE. When do we meet again?

MAURICE. We'll meet tomorrow, dear. And then we'll never part
again.

JEANNE. [Embraces him] Never, never to part again! [She makes the
sign of the cross on his forehead] May God protect you!

MAURICE. [Moved against his own will] My dear, beloved Jeanne!

(JEANNE and MARION go toward the right; MAURICE toward the left.
Both turn around simultaneously and throw kisses at each other.)

MAURICE. [Comes back] Jeanne, I am ashamed of myself. I am always
forgetting you, and you are the last one to remind me of it. Here
are the tickets for tonight.

JEANNE. Thank you, dear, but--you have to take up your post of
duty alone, and so I have to take up mine--with Marion.

MAURICE. Your wisdom is as great as the goodness of your heart.
Yes, I am sure no other woman would have sacrificed a pleasure to
serve her husband--I must have my hands free tonight, and there is
no place for women and children on the battle-field--and this you
understood!

JEANNE. Don't think too highly of a poor woman like myself, and
then you'll have no illusions to lose. And now you'll see that I
can be as forgetful as you--I have bought you a tie and a pair of
gloves which I thought you might wear for my sake on your day of
honour.

MAURICE. [Kissing her hand] Thank you, dear.

JEANNE. And then, Maurice, don't forget to have your hair fixed,
as you do all the time. I want you to be good-looking, so that
others will like you too.

MAURICE. There is no jealousy in _you_!

JEANNE. Don't mention that word, for evil thoughts spring from it.

MAURICE. Just now I feel as if I could give up this evening's
victory--for I am going to win--

JEANNE. Hush, hush!

MAURICE. And go home with you instead.

JEANNE. But you mustn't do that! Go now: your destiny is waiting
for you.

MAURICE. Good-bye then! And may that happen which must happen!
[Goes out.]

JEANNE. [Alone with MARION] O Crux! Ave spes unica!

(Curtain.)


SECOND SCENE

(The Crêmerie. On the right stands a buffet, on which are placed
an aquarium with goldfish and dishes containing vegetables, fruit,
preserves, etc. In the background is a door leading to the
kitchen, where workmen are taking their meals. At the other end of
the kitchen can be seen a door leading out to a garden. On the
left, in the background, stands a counter on a raised platform,
and back of it are shelves containing all sorts of bottles. On the
right, a long table with a marble top is placed along the wall,
and another table is placed parallel to the first further out on
the floor. Straw-bottomed chairs stand around the tables. The
walls are covered with oil-paintings.)

(MME. CATHERINE is sitting at the counter.)

(MAURICE stands leaning against it. He has his hat on and is
smoking a cigarette.)

MME. CATHERINE. So it's tonight the great event comes off,
Monsieur Maurice?

MAURICE. Yes, tonight.

MME. CATHERINE. Do you feel upset?

MAURICE. Cool as a cucumber.

MME. CATHERINE. Well, I wish you luck anyhow, and you have
deserved it, Monsieur Maurice, after having had to fight against
such difficulties as yours.

MAURICE. Thank you, Madame Catherine. You have been very kind to
me, and without your help I should probably have been down and out
by this time.

MME. CATHERINE. Don't let us talk of that now. I help along where
I see hard work and the right kind of will, but I don't want to be
exploited--Can we trust you to come back here after the play and
let us drink a glass with you?

MAURICE. Yes, you can--of course, you can, as I have already
promised you.

(HENRIETTE enters from the right.)

(MAURICE turns around, raises his hat, and stares at HENRIETTE,
who looks him over carefully.)

HENRIETTE. Monsieur Adolphe is not here yet?

MME. CATHERINE. No, madame. But he'll soon be here now. Won't you
sit down?

HENRIETTE. No, thank you, I'll rather wait for him outside. [Goes
out.]

MAURICE. Who--was--that?

MME. CATHERINE. Why, that's Monsieur Adolphe's friend.

MAURICE. Was--that--her?

MME. CATHERINE. Have you never seen her before?

MAURICE. No, he has been hiding her from me, just as if he was
afraid I might take her away from him.

MME. CATHERINE. Ha-ha!--Well, how did you think she looked?

MAURICE. How she looked? Let me see: I can't tell--I didn't see
her, for it was as if she had rushed straight into my arms at once
and come so close to me that I couldn't make out her features at
all. And she left her impression on the air behind her. I can
still see her standing there. [He goes toward the door and makes a
gesture as if putting his arm around somebody] Whew! [He makes a
gesture as if he had pricked his finger] There are pins in her
waist. She is of the kind that stings!

MME. CATHERINE. Oh, you are crazy, you with your ladies!

MAURICE. Yes, it's craziness, that's what it is. But do you know,
Madame Catherine, I am going before she comes back, or else, or
else--Oh, that woman is horrible!

MME. CATHERINE. Are you afraid?

MAURICE. Yes, I am afraid for myself, and also for some others.

MME. CATHERINE. Well, go then.

MAURICE. She seemed to suck herself out through the door, and in
her wake rose a little whirlwind that dragged me along--Yes, you
may laugh, but can't you see that the palm over there on the
buffet is still shaking? She's the very devil of a woman!

MME. CATHERINE. Oh, get out of here, man, before you lose all your
reason.

MAURICE. I want to go, but I cannot--Do you believe in fate,
Madame Catherine?

MME. CATHERINE. No, I believe in a good God, who protects us
against evil powers if we ask Him in the right way.

MAURICE. So there are evil powers after all! I think I can hear
them in the hallway now.

MME. CATHERINE. Yes, her clothes rustle as when the clerk tears
off a piece of linen for you. Get away now--through the kitchen.

(MAURICE rushes toward the kitchen door, where he bumps into
EMILE.)

EMILE. I beg your pardon. [He retires the way he came.]

ADOLPHE. [Comes in first; after him HENRIETTE] Why, there's
Maurice. How are you? Let me introduce this lady here to my oldest
and best friend. Mademoiselle Henriette--Monsieur Maurice.

MAURICE. [Saluting stiffly] Pleased to meet you.

HENRIETTA. We have seen each other before.

ADOLPHE. Is that so? When, if I may ask?

MAURICE. A moment ago. Right here.

ADOLPHE. O-oh!--But now you must stay and have a chat with us.

MAURICE. [After a glance at MME. CATHERINE] If I only had time.

ADOLPHE. Take the time. And we won't be sitting here very long.

HENRIETTE. I won't interrupt, if you have to talk business.

MAURICE. The only business we have is so bad that we don't want to
talk of it.

HENRIETTE. Then we'll talk of something else. [Takes the hat away
from MAURICE and hangs it up] Now be nice, and let me become
acquainted with the great author.

MME. CATHERINE signals to MAURICE, who doesn't notice her.

ADOLPHE. That's right, Henriette, you take charge of him. [They
seat themselves at one of the tables.]

HENRIETTE. [To MAURICE] You certainly have a good friend in
Adolphe, Monsieur Maurice. He never talks of anything but you, and
in such a way that I feel myself rather thrown in the background.

ADOLPHE. You don't say so! Well, Henriette on her side never
leaves me in peace about you, Maurice. She has read your works,
and she is always wanting to know where you got this and where
that. She has been questioning me about your looks, your age, your
tastes. I have, in a word, had you for breakfast, dinner, and
supper. It has almost seemed as if the three of us were living
together.

MAURICE. [To HENRIETTE] Heavens, why didn't you come over here and
have a look at this wonder of wonders? Then your curiosity could
have been satisfied in a trice.

HENRIETTE. Adolphe didn't want it.

(ADOLPHE looks embarrassed.)

HENRIETTE. Not that he was jealous--

MAURICE. And why should he be, when he knows that my feelings are
tied up elsewhere?

HENRIETTE. Perhaps he didn't trust the stability of your feelings.

MAURICE. I can't understand that, seeing that I am notorious for
my constancy.

ADOLPHE. Well, it wasn't that--

HENRIETTE. [Interrupting him] Perhaps that is because you have not
faced the fiery ordeal--

ADOLPHE. Oh, you don't know--

HENRIETTE. [Interrupting]--for the world has not yet beheld a
faithful man.

MAURICE. Then it's going to behold one.

HENRIETTE. Where?

MAURICE. Here.

(HENRIETTE laughs.)

ADOLPHE. Well, that's going it--

HENRIETTE. [Interrupting him and directing herself continuously to
MAURICE] Do you think I ever trust my dear Adolphe more than a
month at a time?

MAURICE. I have no right to question your lack of confidence, but
I can guarantee that Adolphe is faithful.

HENRIETTE. You don't need to do so--my tongue is just running away
with me, and I have to take back a lot--not only for fear of
feeling less generous than you, but because it is the truth. It is
a bad habit I have of only seeing the ugly side of things, and I
keep it up although I know better. But if I had a chance to be
with you two for some time, then your company would make me good
once more. Pardon me, Adolphe! [She puts her hand against his
cheek.]

ADOLPHE. You are always wrong in your talk and right in your
actions. What you really think--that I don't know.

HENRIETTE. Who does know that kind of thing?

MAURICE. Well, if we had to answer for our thoughts, who could
then clear himself?

HENRIETTE. Do you also have evil thoughts?

MAURICE. Certainly; just as I commit the worst kind of cruelties
in my dreams.

HENRIETTE. Oh, when you are dreaming, of course--Just think of it-
No, I am ashamed of telling--

MAURICE. Go on, go on!

HENRIETTE. Last night I dreamt that I was coolly dissecting the
muscles on Adolphe's breast--you see, I am a sculptor--and he,
with his usual kindness, made no resistance, but helped me instead
with the worst places, as he knows more anatomy than I.

MAURICE. Was he dead?

HENRIETTE. No, he was living.

MAURICE. But that's horrible! And didn't it make YOU suffer?

HENRIETTE. Not at all, and that astonished me most, for I am
rather sensitive to other people's sufferings. Isn't that so,
Adolphe?

ADOLPHE. That's right. Rather abnormally so, in fact, and not the
least when animals are concerned.

MAURICE. And I, on the other hand, am rather callous toward the
sufferings both of myself and others.

ADOLPHE. Now he is not telling the truth about himself. Or what do
you say, Madame Catherine?

MME. CATHERINE. I don't know of anybody with a softer heart than
Monsieur Maurice. He came near calling in the police because I
didn't give the goldfish fresh water--those over there on the
buffet. Just look at them: it is as if they could hear what I am
saying.

MAURICE. Yes, here we are making ourselves out as white as angels,
and yet we are, taking it all in all, capable of any kind of
polite atrocity the moment glory, gold, or women are concerned--So
you are a sculptor, Mademoiselle Henriette?

HENRIETTE. A bit of one. Enough to do a bust. And to do one of
you--which has long been my cherished dream--I hold myself quite
capable.

MAURICE. Go ahead! That dream at least need not be long in coming
true.

HENRIETTE. But I don't want to fix your features in my mind until
this evening's success is over. Not until then will you have
become what you should be.

MAURICE. How sure you are of victory!

HENRIETTE. Yes, it is written on your face that you are going to
win this battle, and I think you must feel that yourself.

MAURICE. Why do you think so?

HENRIETTE. Because I can feel it. This morning I was ill, you
know, and now I am well.

(ADOLPHE begins to look depressed.)

MAURICE. [Embarrassed] Listen, I have a single ticket left--only
one. I place it at your disposal, Adolphe.

ADOLPHE. Thank you, but I surrender it to Henriette.

HENRIETTE. But that wouldn't do?

ADOLPHE. Why not? And I never go to the theatre anyhow, as I
cannot stand the heat.

HENRIETTE. But you will come and take us home at least after the
show is over.

ADOLPHE. If you insist on it. Otherwise Maurice has to come back
here, where we shall all be waiting for him.

MAURICE. You can just as well take the trouble of meeting us. In
fact, I ask, I beg you to do so--And if you don't want to wait
outside the theatre, you can meet us at the Auberge des Adrets--
That's settled then, isn't it?

ADOLPHE. Wait a little. You have a way of settling things to suit
yourself, before other people have a chance to consider them.

MAURICE. What is there to consider--whether you are to see your
lady home or not?

ADOLPHE. You never know what may be involved in a simple act like
that, but I have a sort of premonition.

HENRIETTE. Hush, hush, hush! Don't talk of spooks while the sun is
shining. Let him come or not, as it pleases him. We can always
find our way back here.

ADOLPHE. [Rising] Well, now I have to leave you--model, you know.
Good-bye, both of you. And good luck to you, Maurice. To-morrow
you will be out on the right side. Good-bye, Henriette.

HENRIETTE. Do you really have to go?

ADOLPHE. I must.

MAURICE. Good-bye then. We'll meet later.

(ADOLPHE goes out, saluting MME. CATHERINE in passing.)

HENRIETTE. Think of it, that we should meet at last!

MAURICE. Do you find anything remarkable in that?

HENRIETTE. It looks as if it had to happen, for Adolphe has done
his best to prevent it.

MAURICE. Has he?

HENRIETTE. Oh, you must have noticed it.

MAURICE. I have noticed it, but why should you mention it?

HENRIETTE. I had to.

MAURICE. No, and I don't have to tell you that I wanted to run
away through the kitchen in order to avoid meeting you and was
stopped by a guest who closed the door in front of me.

HENRIETTE. Why do you tell me about it now?

MAURICE. I don't know.

(MME. CATHERINE upsets a number of glasses and bottles.)

MAURICE. That's all right, Madame Catherine. There's nothing to be
afraid of.

HENRIETTE. Was that meant as a signal or a warning?

MAURICE. Probably both.

HENRIETTE. Do they take me for a locomotive that has to have
flagmen ahead of it?

MAURICE. And switchmen! The danger is always greatest at the
switches.

HENRIETTE. How nasty you can be!

MME. CATHERINE. Monsieur Maurice isn't nasty at all. So far nobody
has been kinder than he to those that love him and trust in him.

MAURICE. Sh, sh, sh!

HENRIETTE. [To MAURICE] The old lady is rather impertinent.

MAURICE. We can walk over to the boulevard, if you care to do so.

HENRIETTE. With pleasure. This is not the place for me. I can just
feel their hatred clawing at me. [Goes out.]

MAURICE. [Starts after her] Good-bye, Madame Catherine.

MME. CATHERINE. A moment! May I speak a word to you, Monsieur
Maurice?

MAURICE. [Stops unwillingly] What is it?

MME. CATHERINE. Don't do it! Don't do it!

MAURICE. What?

MME. CATHERINE. Don't do it!

MAURICE. Don't be scared. This lady is not my kind, but she
interests me. Or hardly that even.

MME. CATHERINE, Don't trust yourself!

MAURICE. Yes, I do trust myself. Good-bye. [Goes out.]

(Curtain.)


ACT II

FIRST SCENE

(The Auberge des Adrets: a café in sixteenth century style, with a
suggestion of stage effect. Tables and easy-chairs are scattered
in corners and nooks. The walls are decorated with armour and
weapons. Along the ledge of the wainscoting stand glasses and
jugs.)

(MAURICE and HENRIETTE are in evening dress and sit facing each
other at a table on which stands a bottle of champagne and three
filled glasses. The third glass is placed at that side of the
table which is nearest the background, and there an easy-chair is
kept ready for the still missing "third man.")

MAURICE. [Puts his watch in front of himself on the table] If he
doesn't get here within the next five minutes, he isn't coming at
all. And suppose in the meantime we drink with his ghost. [Touches
the third glass with the rim of his own.]

HENRIETTE. [Doing the same] Here's to you, Adolphe!

MAURICE. He won't come.

HENRIETTE. He will come.

MAURICE. He won't.

HENRIETTE. He will.

MAURICE. What an evening! What a wonderful day! I can hardly grasp
that a new life has begun. Think only: the manager believes that I
may count on no less than one hundred thousand francs. I'll spend
twenty thousand on a villa outside the city. That leaves me eighty
thousand. I won't be able to take it all in until to-morrow, for I
am tired, tired, tired. [Sinks back into the chair] Have you ever
felt really happy?

HENRIETTE. Never. How does it feel?

MAURICE. I don't quite know how to put it. I cannot express it,
but I seem chiefly to be thinking of the chagrin of my enemies. It
isn't nice, but that's the way it is.

HENRIETTE. Is it happiness to be thinking of one's enemies?

MAURICE. Why, the victor has to count his killed and wounded
enemies in order to gauge the extent of his victory.

HENRIETTE. Are you as bloodthirsty as all that?

MAURICE. Perhaps not. But when you have felt the pressure of other
people's heels on your chest for years, it must be pleasant to
shake off the enemy and draw a full breath at last.

HENRIETTE. Don't you find it strange that yon are sitting here,
alone with me, an insignificant girl practically unknown to you--
and on an evening like this, when you ought to have a craving to
show yourself like a triumphant hero to all the people, on the
boulevards, in the big restaurants?

MAURICE. Of course, it's rather funny, but it feels good to be
here, and your company is all I care for.

HENRIETTE. You don't look very hilarious.

MAURICE. No, I feel rather sad, and I should like to weep a
little.

HENRIETTE. What is the meaning of that?

MAURICE. It is fortune conscious of its own nothingness and
waiting for misfortune to appear.

HENRIETTE. Oh my, how sad! What is it you are missing anyhow?

MAURICE. I miss the only thing that gives value to life.

HENRIETTE. So you love her no longer then?

MAURICE. Not in the way I understand love. Do you think she has
read my play, or that she wants to see it? Oh, she is so good, so
self-sacrificing and considerate, but to go out with me for a
night's fun she would regard as sinful. Once I treated her to
champagne, you know, and instead of feeling happy over it, she
picked up the wine list to see what it cost. And when she read the
price, she wept--wept because Marion was in need of new stockings.
It is beautiful, of course: it is touching, if you please. But I
can get no pleasure out of it. And I do want a little pleasure
before life runs out. So far I have had nothing but privation, but
now, now--life is beginning for me. [The clock strikes twelve] Now
begins a new day, a new era!

HENRIETTE. Adolphe is not coming.

MAURICE. No, now he won't, come. And now it is too late to go back
to the Crêmerie.

HENRIETTE. But they are waiting for you.

MAURICE. Let them wait. They have made me promise to come, and I
take back my promise. Are you longing to go there?

HENRIETTE. On the contrary!

MAURICE. Will you keep me company then?

HENRIETTE. With pleasure, if you care to have me.

MAURICE. Otherwise I shouldn't be asking you. It is strange, you
know, that the victor's wreath seems worthless if you can't place
it at the feet of some woman--that everything seems worthless when
you have not a woman.

HENRIETTE. You don't need to be without a woman--you?

MAURICE. Well, that's the question.

HENRIETTE. Don't you know that a man is irresistible in his hour
of success and fame?

MAURICE. No, I don't know, for I have had no experience of it.

HENRIETTE. You are a queer sort! At this moment, when you are the
most envied man in Paris, you sit here and brood. Perhaps your
conscience is troubling you because you have neglected that
invitation to drink chicory coffee with the old lady over at the
milk shop?

MAURICE. Yes, my conscience is troubling me on that score, and
even here I am aware of their resentment, their hurt feelings,
their well-grounded anger. My comrades in distress had the right
to demand my presence this evening. The good Madame Catherine had
a privileged claim on my success, from which a glimmer of hope was
to spread over the poor fellows who have not yet succeeded. And I
have robbed them of their faith in me. I can hear the vows they
have been making: "Maurice will come, for he is a good fellow; he
doesn't despise us, and he never fails to keep his word." Now I
have made them forswear themselves.

(While he is still speaking, somebody in the next room has begun
to play the finale of Beethoven's Sonata in D-minor (Op. 31, No.
3). The allegretto is first played piano, then more forte, and at
last passionately, violently, with complete abandon.)

MAURICE. Who can be playing at this time of the night?

HENRIETTE. Probably some nightbirds of the same kind as we. But
listen! Your presentation of the case is not correct. Remember
that Adolphe promised to meet us here. We waited for him, and he
failed to keep his promise. So that you are not to blame--

MAURICE. You think so? While you are speaking, I believe you, but
when you stop, my conscience begins again. What have you in that
package?

HENRIETTE. Oh, it is only a laurel wreath that I meant to send up
to the stage, but I had no chance to do so. Let me give it to you
now--it is said to have a cooling effect on burning foreheads.
[She rises and crowns him with the wreath; then she kisses him on
the forehead] Hail to the victor!

MAURICE. Don't!

HENRIETTE. [Kneeling] Hail to the King!

MAURICE. [Rising] No, now you scare me.

HENRIETTE. You timid man! You of little faith who are afraid of
fortune even! Who robbed you of your self-assurance and turned you
into a dwarf?

MAURICE. A dwarf? Yes, you are right. I am not working up in the
clouds, like a giant, with crashing and roaring, but I forge my
weapons deep down in the silent heart of the mountain. You think
that my modesty shrinks before the victor's wreath. On the
contrary, I despise it: it is not enough for me. You think I am
afraid of that ghost with its jealous green eyes which sits over
there and keeps watch on my feelings--the strength of which you
don't suspect. Away, ghost! [He brushes the third, untouched glass
off the table] Away with you, you superfluous third person--you
absent one who has lost your rights, if you ever had any. You
stayed away from the field of battle because you knew yourself
already beaten. As I crush this glass under my foot, so I will
crush the image of yourself which you have reared in a temple no
longer yours.

HENRIETTE. Good! That's the way! Well spoken, my hero!

MAURICE. Now I have sacrificed my best friend, my most faithful
helper, on your altar, Astarte! Are you satisfied?

HENRIETTE. Astarte is a pretty name, and I'll keep it--I think you
love me, Maurice.

MAURICE. Of course I do--Woman of evil omen, you who stir up man's
courage with your scent of blood, whence do you come and where do
you lead me? I loved you before I saw you, for I trembled when I
heard them speak of you. And when I saw you in the doorway, your
soul poured itself into mine. And when you left, I could still
feel your presence in my arms. I wanted to flee from you, but
something held me back, and this evening we have been driven
together as the prey is driven into the hunter's net. Whose is the
fault? Your friend's, who pandered for us!

HENRIETTE. Fault or no fault: what does it matter, and what does
it mean?--Adolphe has been at fault in not bringing us together
before. He is guilty of having stolen from us two weeks of bliss,
to which he had no right himself. I am jealous of him on your
behalf. I hate him because he has cheated you out of your
mistress. I should like to blot him from the host of the living,
and his memory with him--wipe him out of the past even, make him
unmade, unborn!

MAURICE. Well, we'll bury him beneath our own memories. We'll
cover him with leaves and branches far out in the wild woods, and
then we'll pile stone on top of the mound so that he will never
look up again. [Raising his glass] Our fate is sealed. Woe unto
us! What will come next?

HENRIETTE. Next comes the new era--What have you in that package?

MAURICE. I cannot remember.

HENRIETTE. [Opens the package and takes out a tie and a pair of
gloves] That tie is a fright! It must have cost at least fifty
centimes.

MAURICE. [Snatching the things away from her] Don't you touch
them!

HENRIETTE. They are from her?

MAURICE. Yes, they are.

HENRIETTE. Give them to me.

MAURICE. No, she's better than we, better than everybody else.

HENRIETTE. I don't believe it. She is simply stupider and
stingier. One who weeps because you order champagne--

MAURICE. When the child was without stockings. Yes, she is a good
woman.

HENRIETTE. Philistine! You'll never be an artist. But I am an
artist, and I'll make a bust of you with a shopkeeper's cap
instead of the laurel wreath--Her name is Jeanne?

MAURICE. How do you know?

HENRIETTE. Why, that's the name of all housekeepers.

MAURICE. Henriette!

(HENRIETTE takes the tie and the gloves and throws them into the
fireplace.)

MAURICE. [Weakly] Astarte, now you demand the sacrifice of women.
You shall have them, but if you ask for innocent children, too,
then I'll send you packing.

HENRIETTE. Can you tell me what it is that binds you to me?

MAURICE. If I only knew, I should be able to tear myself away. But
I believe it must be those qualities which you have and I lack. I
believe that the evil within you draws me with the irresistible
lure of novelty.

HENRIETTE. Have you ever committed a crime?

MAURICE. No real one. Have you?

HENRIETTE. Yes.

MAURICE. Well, how did you find it?

HENRIETTE. It was greater than to perform a good deed, for by that
we are placed on equality with others; it was greater than to
perform some act of heroism, for by that we are raised above
others and rewarded. That crime placed me outside and beyond life,
society, and my fellow-beings. Since then I am living only a
partial life, a sort of dream life, and that's why reality never
gets a hold on me.

MAURICE. What was it you did?

HENRIETTE. I won't tell, for then you would get scared again.

MAURICE. Can you never be found out?

HENRIETTE. Never. But that does not prevent me from seeing,
frequently, the five stones at the Place de Roquette, where the
scaffold used to stand; and for this reason I never dare to open a
pack of cards, as I always turn up the five-spot of diamonds.

MAURICE. Was it that kind of a crime?

HENRIETTE. Yes, it was that kind.

MAURICE. Of course, it's horrible, but it is interesting. Have you
no conscience?

HENRIETTE. None, but I should be grateful if you would talk of
something else.

MAURICE. Suppose we talk of--love?

HENRIETTE. Of that you don't talk until it is over.

MAURICE. Have you been in love with Adolphe?

HENRIETTE. I don't know. The goodness of his nature drew me like
some beautiful, all but vanished memory of childhood. Yet there
was much about his person that offended my eye, so that I had to
spend a long time retouching, altering, adding, subtracting,
before I could make a presentable figure of him. When he talked, I
could notice that he had learned from you, and the lesson was
often badly digested and awkwardly applied. You can imagine then
how miserable the copy must appear now, when I am permitted to
study the original. That's why he was afraid of having us two
meet; and when it did happen, he understood at once that his time
was up.

MAURICE. Poor Adolphe!

HENRIETTE. I feel sorry for him, too, as I know he must be
suffering beyond all bounds--

MAURICE. Sh! Somebody is coming.

HENRIETTE. I wonder if it could be he?

MAURICE. That would be unbearable.

HENRIETTE. No, it isn't he, but if it had been, how do you think
the situation would have shaped itself?

MAURICE. At first he would have been a little sore at you because
he had made a mistake in regard to the meeting-place--and tried to
find us in several other cafes--but his soreness would have
changed into pleasure at finding us--and seeing that we had not
deceived him. And in the joy at having wronged us by his
suspicions, he would love both of us. And so it would make him
happy to notice that we had become such good friends. It had
always been his dream--hm! he is making the speech now--his dream
that the three of us should form a triumvirate that could set the
world a great example of friendship asking for nothing--"Yes, I
trust you, Maurice, partly because you are my friend, and partly
because your feelings are tied up elsewhere."

HENRIETTE. Bravo! You must have been in a similar situation
before, or you couldn't give such a lifelike picture of it. Do you
know that Adolphe is just that kind of a third person who cannot
enjoy his mistress without having his friend along?

MAURICE. That's why I had to be called in to entertain you--Hush!
There is somebody outside--It must be he.

HENRIETTE. No, don't you know these are the hours when ghosts
walk, and then you can see so many things, and hear them also. To
keep awake at night, when you ought to be sleeping, has for me the
same charm as a crime: it is to place oneself above and beyond the
laws of nature.

MAURICE. But the punishment is fearful--I am shivering or
quivering, with cold or with fear.

HENRIETTE. [Wraps her opera cloak about him] Put this on. It will
make you warm.

MAURICE. That's nice. It is as if I were inside of your skin, as
if my body had been melted up by lack of sleep and were being
remoulded in your shape. I can feel the moulding process going on.
But I am also growing a new soul, new thoughts, and here, where
your bosom has left an impression, I can feel my own beginning to
bulge.

(During this entire scene, the pianist in the next room has been
practicing the Sonata in D-minor, sometimes pianissimo, sometimes
wildly fortissimo; now and then he has kept silent for a little
while, and at other times nothing has been heard but a part of the
finale: bars 96 to 107.)

MAURICE. What a monster, to sit there all night practicing on the
piano. It gives me a sick feeling. Do you know what I propose? Let
us drive out to the Bois de Boulogne and take breakfast in the
Pavilion, and see the sun rise over the lakes.

HENRIETTE. Bully!

MAURICE. But first of all I must arrange to have my mail and the
morning papers sent out by messenger to the Pavilion. Tell me,
Henriette: shall we invite Adolphe?

HENRIETTE. Oh, that's going too far! But why not? The ass can also
be harnessed to the triumphal chariot. Let him come. [They get
up.]

MAURICE. [Taking off the cloak] Then I'll ring.

HENRIETTE. Wait a moment! [Throws herself into his arms.]

(Curtain.)


SECOND SCENE

(A large, splendidly furnished restaurant room in the Bois de
Boulogne. It is richly carpeted and full of mirrors, easy-chairs,
and divans. There are glass doors in the background, and beside
them windows overlooking the lakes. In the foreground a table is
spread, with flowers in the centre, bowls full of fruit, wine in
decanters, oysters on platters, many different kinds of wine
glasses, and two lighted candelabra. On the right there is a round
table full of newspapers and telegrams.)

(MAURICE and HENRIETTE are sitting opposite each other at this
small table.)

(The sun is just rising outside.)

MAURICE. There is no longer any doubt about it. The newspapers
tell me it is so, and these telegrams congratulate me on my
success. This is the beginning of a new life, and my fate is
wedded to yours by this night, when you were the only one to share
my hopes and my triumph. From your hand I received the laurel, and
it seems to me as if everything had come from you.

HENRIETTE. What a wonderful night! Have we been dreaming, or is
this something we have really lived through?

MAURICE. [Rising] And what a morning after such a night! I feel as
if it were the world's first day that is now being illumined by
the rising sun. Only this minute was the earth created and
stripped of those white films that are now floating off into
space. There lies the Garden of Eden in the rosy light of dawn,
and here is the first human couple--Do you know, I am so happy I
could cry at the thought that all mankind is not equally happy--Do
you hear that distant murmur as of ocean waves beating against a
rocky shore, as of winds sweeping through a forest? Do you know
what it is? It is Paris whispering my name. Do you see the columns
of smoke that rise skyward in thousands and tens of thousands?
They are the fires burning on my altars, and if that be not so,
then it must become so, for I will it. At this moment all the
telegraph instruments of Europe are clicking out my name. The
Oriental Express is carrying the newspapers to the Far East,
toward the rising sun; and the ocean steamers are carrying them to
the utmost West. The earth is mine, and for that reason it is
beautiful. Now I should like to have wings for us two, so that we
might rise from here and fly far, far away, before anybody can
soil my happiness, before envy has a chance to wake me out of my
dream--for it is probably a dream!

HENRIETTE. [Holding out her hand to him] Here you can feel that
you are not dreaming.

MAURICE. It is not a dream, but it has been one. As a poor young
man, you know, when I was walking in the woods down there, and
looked up to this Pavilion, it looked to me like a fairy castle,
and always my thoughts carried me up to this room, with the
balcony outside and the heavy curtains, as to a place of supreme
bliss. To be sitting here in company with a beloved woman and see
the sun rise while the candles were still burning in the
candelabra: that was the most audacious dream of my youth. Now it
has come true, and now I have no more to ask of life--Do you want
to die now, together with me?

HENRIETTE. No, you fool! Now I want to begin living.

MAURICE. [Rising] To live: that is to suffer! Now comes reality. I
can hear his steps on the stairs. He is panting with alarm, and
his heart is beating with dread of having lost what it holds most
precious. Can you believe me if I tell you that Adolphe is under
this roof? Within a minute he will be standing in the middle of
this floor.

HENRIETTE. [Alarmed] It was a stupid trick to ask him to come
here, and I am already regretting it--Well, we shall see anyhow if
your forecast of the situation proves correct.

MAURICE. Oh, it is easy to be mistaken about a person's feelings.

(The HEAD WAITER enters with a card.)

MAURICE. Ask the gentleman to step in. [To HENRIETTE] I am afraid
we'll regret this.

HENRIETTE. Too late to think of that now--Hush!

(ADOLPHE enters, pale and hollow-eyed.)

MAURICE. [Trying to speak unconcernedly] There you are! What
became of you last night?

ADOLPHE. I looked for you at the Hotel des Arrets and waited a
whole hour.

MAURICE. So you went to the wrong place. We were waiting several
hours for you at the Auberge des Adrets, and we are still waiting
for you, as you see.

ADOLPHE. [Relieved] Thank heaven!

HENRIETTE. Good morning, Adolphe. You are always expecting the
worst and worrying yourself needlessly. I suppose you imagined
that we wanted to avoid your company. And though you see that we
sent for you, you are still thinking yourself superfluous.

ADOLPHE. Pardon me: I was wrong, but the night was dreadful.

(They sit down. Embarrassed silence follows.)

HENRIETTE. [To ADOLPHE] Well, are you not going to congratulate
Maurice on his great success?

ADOLPHE. Oh, yes! Your success is the real thing, and envy itself
cannot deny it. Everything is giving way before you, and even I
have a sense of my own smallness in your presence.

MAURICE. Nonsense!--Henriette, are you not going to offer Adolphe
a glass of wine?

ADOLPHE. Thank you, not for me--nothing at all!

HENRIETTE. [To ADOLPHE] What's the matter with you? Are you ill?

ADOLPHE. Not yet, but--

HENRIETTE. Your eyes--

ADOLPHE. What of them?

MAURICE. What happened at the Crêmerie last night? I suppose they
are angry with me?

ADOLPHE. Nobody is angry with you, but your absence caused a
depression which it hurt me to watch. But nobody was angry with
you, believe me. Your friends understood, and they regarded your
failure to come with sympathetic forbearance. Madame Catherine
herself defended you and proposed your health. We all rejoiced in
your success as if it had been our own.

HENRIETTE. Well, those are nice people! What good friends you
have, Maurice.

MAURICE. Yes, better than I deserve.

ADOLPHE. Nobody has better friends than he deserves, and you are a
man greatly blessed in his friends--Can't you feel how the air is
softened to-day by all the kind thoughts and wishes that stream
toward you from a thousand breasts?

(MAURICE rises in order to hide his emotion.)

ADOLPHE. From a thousand breasts that you have rid of the
nightmare that had been crushing them during a lifetime. Humanity
had been slandered--and you have exonerated it: that's why men
feel grateful toward you. To-day they are once more holding their
heads high and saying: You see, we are a little better than our
reputation after all. And that thought makes them better.

(HENRIETTE tries to hide her emotion.)

ADOLPHE. Am I in the way? Just let me warm myself a little in your
sunshine, Maurice, and then I'll go.

MAURICE. Why should you go when you have only just arrived?

ADOLPHE. Why? Because I have seen what I need not have seen;
because I know now that my hour is past. [Pause] That you sent for
me, I take as an expression of thoughtfulness, a notice of what
has happened, a frankness that hurts less than deceit. You hear
that I think well of my fellow-beings, and this I have learned
from you, Maurice. [Pause] But, my friend, a few moments ago I
passed through the Church of St. Germain, and there I saw a woman
and a child. I am not wishing that you had seen them, for what has
happened cannot be altered, but if you gave a thought or a word to
them before you set them adrift on the waters of the great city,
then you could enjoy your happiness undisturbed. And now I bid you
good-by.

HENRIETTE. Why must you go?

ADOLPHE. And you ask that? Do you want me to tell you?

HENRIETTE. No, I don't.

ADOLPHE. Good-by then! [Goes out.]

MAURICE. The Fall: and lo! "they knew that they were naked."

HENRIETTE. What a difference between this scene and the one we
imagined! He is better than we.

MAURICE. It seems to me now as if all the rest were better than
we.

HENRIETTE. Do you see that the sun has vanished behind clouds, and
that the woods have lost their rose colour?

MAURICE. Yes, I see, and the blue lake has turned black. Let us
flee to some place where the sky is always blue and the trees are
always green.

HENRIETTE. Yes, let us--but without any farewells.

MAURICE. No, with farewells.

HENRIETTE. We were to fly. You spoke of wings--and your feet are
of lead. I am not jealous, but if you go to say farewell and get
two pairs of arms around your neck--then you can't tear yourself
away.

MAURICE. Perhaps you are right, but only one pair of little arms
is needed to hold me fast.

HENRIETTE. It is the child that holds you then, and not the woman?

MAURICE. It is the child.

HENRIETTE. The child! Another woman's child! And for the sake of
it I am to suffer. Why must that child block the way where I want
to pass, and must pass?

MAURICE. Yes, why? It would be better if it had never existed.

HENRIETTE. [Walks excitedly back and forth] Indeed! But now it
does exist. Like a rock on the road, a rock set firmly in the
ground, immovable, so that it upsets the carriage.

MAURICE. The triumphal chariot!--The ass is driven to death, but
the rock remains. Curse it! [Pause.]

HENRIETTE. There is nothing to do.

MAURICE. Yes, we must get married, and then our child will make us
forget the other one.

HENRIETTE. This will kill this!

MAURICE. Kill! What kind of word is that?

HENRIETTE. [Changing tone] Your child will kill our love.

MAURICE. No, girl, our love will kill whatever stands in its way,
but it will not be killed.

HENRIETTE. [Opens a deck of cards lying on the mantlepiece] Look
at it! Five-spot of diamonds--the scaffold! Can it be possible
that our fates are determined in advance? That our thoughts are
guided as if through pipes to the spot for which they are bound,
without chance for us to stop them? But I don't want it, I don't
want it!--Do you realise that I must go to the scaffold if my
crime should be discovered?

MAURICE. Tell me about your crime. Now is the time for it.

HENRIETTE. No, I should regret it afterward, and you would despise
me--no, no, no!--Have you ever heard that a person could be hated
to death? Well, my father incurred the hatred of my mother and my
sisters, and he melted away like wax before a fire. Ugh! Let us
talk of something else. And, above all, let us get away. The air
is poisoned here. To-morrow your laurels will be withered, the
triumph will be forgotten, and in a week another triumphant hero
will hold the public attention. Away from here, to work for new
victories! But first of all, Maurice, you must embrace your child
and provide for its immediate future. You don't have to see the
mother at all.

MAURICE. Thank you! Your good heart does you honour, and I love
you doubly when you show the kindness you generally hide.

HENRIETTE. And then you go to the Crêmerie and say good-by to the
old lady and your friends. Leave no unsettled business behind to
make your mind heavy on our trip.

MAURICE. I'll clear up everything, and to-night we meet at the
railroad station.

HENRIETTE. Agreed! And then: away from here--away toward the sea
and the sun!

(Curtain.)


ACT III

FIRST SCENE

(In the Crêmerie. The gas is lit. MME. CATHERINE is seated at the
counter, ADOLPHE at a table.)

MME. CATHERINE. Such is life, Monseiur Adolphe. But you young ones
are always demanding too much, and then you come here and blubber
over it afterward.

ADOLPHE. No, it isn't that. I reproach nobody, and I am as fond as
ever of both of them. But there is one thing that makes me sick at
heart. You see, I thought more of Maurice than of anybody else; so
much that I wouldn't have grudged him anything that could give him
pleasure--but now I have lost him, and it hurts me worse than the
loss of her. I have lost both of them, and so my loneliness is
made doubly painful. And then there is still something else which
I have not yet been able to clear up.

MME. CATHERINE. Don't brood so much. Work and divert yourself.
Now, for instance, do you ever go to church?

ADOLPHE. What should I do there?

MME. CATHERINE. Oh, there's so much to look at, and then there is
the music. There is nothing commonplace about it, at least.

ADOLPHE. Perhaps not. But I don't belong to that fold, I guess,
for it never stirs me to any devotion. And then, Madame Catherine,
faith is a gift, they tell me, and I haven't got it yet.

MME. CATHERINE. Well, wait till you get it--But what is this I
heard a while ago? Is it true that you have sold a picture in
London for a high price, and that you have got a medal?

ADOLPHE. Yes, it's true.

MME. CATHERINE. Merciful heavens!--and not a word do you say about
it?

ADOLPHE. I am afraid of fortune, and besides it seems almost
worthless to me at this moment. I am afraid of it as of a spectre:
it brings disaster to speak of having seen it.

MME. CATHERINE. You're a queer fellow, and that's what you have
always been.

ADOLPHE. Not queer at all, but I have seen so much misfortune come
in the wake of fortune, and I have seen how adversity brings out
true friends, while none but false ones appear in the hour of
success--You asked me if I ever went to church, and I answered
evasively. This morning I stepped into the Church of St. Germain
without really knowing why I did so. It seemed as if I were
looking for somebody in there--somebody to whom I could silently
offer my gratitude. But I found nobody. Then I dropped a gold coin
in the poor-box. It was all I could get out of my church-going,
and that was rather commonplace, I should say.

MME. CATHERINE. It was always something; and then it was fine to
think of the poor after having heard good news.

ADOLPHE. It was neither fine nor anything else: it was something I
did because I couldn't help myself. But something more occurred
while I was in the church. I saw Maurice's girl friend, Jeanne,
and her child. Struck down, crushed by his triumphal chariot, they
seemed aware of the full extent of their misfortune.

MME. CATHERINE. Well, children, I don't know in what kind of shape
you keep your consciences. But how a decent fellow, a careful and
considerate man like Monsieur Maurice, can all of a sudden desert
a woman and her child, that is something I cannot explain.

ADOLPHE. Nor can I explain it, and he doesn't seem to understand
it himself. I met them this morning, and everything appeared quite
natural to them, quite proper, as if they couldn't imagine
anything else. It was as if they had been enjoying the satisfaction
of a good deed or the fulfilment of a sacred duty. There are things,
Madame Catherine, that we cannot explain, and for this reason it
is not for us to judge. And besides, you saw how it happened.
Maurice felt the danger in the air. I foresaw it and tried to
prevent their meeting. Maurice wanted to run away from it, but
nothing helped. Why, it was as if a plot had been laid by some
invisible power, and as if they had been driven by guile into
each other's arms. Of course, I am disqualified in this case, but
I wouldn't hesitate to pronounce a verdict of "not guilty."

MME. CATHERINE. Well, now, to be able to forgive as you do, that's
what I call religion.

ADOLPHE. Heavens, could it be that I am religious without knowing
it.

MME. CATHERINE. But then, to _let_ oneself be driven or tempted
into evil, as Monsieur Maurice has done, means weakness or bad
character. And if you feel your strength failing you, then you ask
for help, and then you get it. But he was too conceited to do
that--Who is this coming? The Abbé, I think.

ADOLPHE. What does he want here?

ABBÉ. [Enters] Good evening, madame. Good evening, Monsieur.

MME. CATHERINE. Can I be of any service?

ABBÉ. Has Monsieur Maurice, the author, been here to-day?

MME. CATHERINE. Not to-day. His play has just been put on, and
that is probably keeping him busy.

ABBÉ. I have--sad news to bring him. Sad in several respects.

MME. CATHERINE. May I ask of what kind?

ABBÉ. Yes, it's no secret. The daughter he had with that girl,
Jeanne, is dead.

MME. CATHERINE. Dead!

ADOLPHE. Marion dead!

ABBÉ. Yes, she died suddenly this morning without any previous
illness.

MME. CATHERINE. O Lord, who can tell Thy ways!

ABBÉ. The mother's grief makes it necessary that Monsieur Maurice
look after her, so we must try to find him. But first a question
in confidence: do you know whether Monsieur Maurice was fond of
the child, or was indifferent to it?

MME. CATHERINE. If he was fond of Marion? Why, all of us know how
he loved her.

ADOLPHE. There's no doubt about that.

ABBÉ. I am glad to hear it, and it settles the matter so far as I
am concerned.

MME. CATHERINE. Has there been any doubt about it?

ABBÉ. Yes, unfortunately. It has even been rumoured in the
neighbourhood that he had abandoned the child and its mother in
order to go away with a strange woman. In a few hours this rumour
has grown into definite accusations, and at the same time the
feeling against him has risen to such a point that his life is
threatened and he is being called a murderer.

MME. CATHERINE. Good God, what is _this_? What does it mean?

ABBÉ. Now I'll tell you my opinion--I am convinced that the man is
innocent on this score, and the mother feels as certain about it
as I do. But appearances are against Monsieur Maurice, and I think
he will find it rather hard to clear himself when the police come
to question him.

ADOLPHE. Have the police got hold of the matter?

ABBÉ. Yea, the police have had to step in to protect him against
all those ugly rumours and the rage of the people. Probably the
Commissaire will be here soon.

MME. CATHERINE. [To ADOLPHE] There you see what happens when a man
cannot tell the difference between good and evil, and when he
trifles with vice. God will punish!

ADOLPHE. Then he is more merciless than man.

ABBÉ. What do you know about that?

ADOLPHE. Not very much, but I keep an eye on what happens--

ABBÉ. And you understand it also?

ADOLPHE. Not yet perhaps.

ABBÉ. Let us look more closely at the matter--Oh, here comes the
Commissaire.

COMMISSAIRE. [Enters] Gentlemen--Madame Catherine--I have to
trouble you for a moment with a few questions concerning Monsieur
Maurice. As you have probably heard, he has become the object of a
hideous rumour, which, by the by, I don't believe in.

MME. CATHERINE. None of us believes in it either.

COMMISSAIRE. That strengthens my own opinion, but for his own sake
I must give him a chance to defend himself.

ABBÉ. That's right, and I guess he will find justice, although it
may come hard.

COMMISSAIRE. Appearances are very much against him, but I have
seen guiltless people reach the scaffold before their innocence
was discovered. Let me tell you what there is against him. The
little girl, Marion, being left alone by her mother, was secretly
visited by the father, who seems to have made sure of the time
when the child was to be found alone. Fifteen minutes after his
visit the mother returned home and found the child dead. All this
makes the position of the accused man very unpleasant--The post-
mortem examination brought out no signs of violence or of poison,
but the physicians admit the existence of new poisons that leave
no traces behind them. To me all this is mere coincidence of the
kind I frequently come across. But here's something that looks
worse. Last night Monsieur Maurice was seen at the Auberge des
Adrets in company with a strange lady. According to the waiter,
they were talking about crimes. The Place de Roquette and the
scaffold were both mentioned. A queer topic of conversation for a
pair of lovers of good breeding and good social position! But even
this may be passed over, as we know by experience that people who
have been drinking and losing a lot of sleep seem inclined to dig
up all the worst that lies at the bottom of their souls. Far more
serious is the evidence given by the head waiter as to their
champagne breakfast in the Bois de Boulogne this morning. He says
that he heard them wish the life out of a child. The man is said
to have remarked that, "It would be better if it had never
existed." To which the woman replied: "Indeed! But now it does
exist." And as they went on talking, these words occurred: "This
will kill this!" And the answer was: "Kill! What kind of word is
that?" And also: "The five-spot of diamonds, the scaffold, the
Place de Roquette." All this, you see, will be hard to get out of,
and so will the foreign journey planned for this evening. These
are serious matters.

ADOLPHE. He is lost!

MME. CATHERINE. That's a dreadful story. One doesn't know what to
believe.

ABBÉ. This is not the work of man. God have mercy on him!

ADOLPHE. He is in the net, and he will never get out of it.

MME. CATHERINE. He had no business to get in.

ADOLPHE. Do you begin to suspect him also, Madame Catherine?

MME. CATHERINE. Yes and no. I have got beyond having an opinion in
this matter. Have you not seen angels turn into devils just as you
turn your hand, and then become angels again?

COMMISSAIRE. It certainly does look queer. However, we'll have to
wait and hear what explanations he can give. No one will be judged
unheard. Good evening, gentlemen. Good evening, Madame Catherine.
[Goes out.]

ABBÉ. This is not the work of man.

ADOLPHE. No, it looks as if demons had been at work for the
undoing of man.

ABBÉ. It is either a punishment for secret misdeeds, or it is a
terrible test.

JEANNE. [Enters, dressed in mourning] Good evening. Pardon me for
asking, but have you seen Monsieur Maurice?

MME. CATHERINE. No, madame, but I think he may be here any minute.
You haven't met him then since--

JEANNE. Not since this morning.

MME. CATHERINE. Let me tell you that I share in your great sorrow.

JEANNE. Thank you, madame. [To the ABBÉ] So you are here, Father.

ABBÉ. Yes, my child. I thought I might be of some use to you. And
it was fortunate, as it gave me a chance to speak to the
Commissaire.

JEANNE. The Commissaire! He doesn't suspect Maurice also, does he?

ABBÉ. No, he doesn't, and none of us here do. But appearances are
against him in a most appalling manner.

JEANNE. You mean on account of the talk the waiters overheard--it
means nothing to me, who has heard such things before when Maurice
had had a few drinks. Then it is his custom to speculate on crimes
and their punishment. Besides it seems to have been the woman in
his company who dropped the most dangerous remarks. I should like
to have a look into that woman's eyes.

ADOLPHE. My dear Jeanne, no matter how much harm that woman may
have done you, she did nothing with evil intention--in fact, she
had no intention whatever, but just followed the promptings of her
nature. I know her to be a good soul and one who can very well
bear being looked straight in the eye.

JEANNE. Your judgment in this matter, Adolphe, has great value to
me, and I believe what you say. It means that I cannot hold
anybody but myself responsible for what has happened. It is my
carelessness that is now being punished. [She begins to cry.]

ABBÉ. Don't accuse yourself unjustly! I know you, and the serious
spirit in which you have regarded your motherhood. That your
assumption of this responsibility had not been sanctioned by
religion and the civil law was not your fault. No, we are here
facing something quite different.

ADOLPHE. What then?

ABBÉ. Who can tell?

(HENRIETTE enters, dressed in travelling suit.)

ADOLPHE. [Rises with an air of determination and goes to meet
HENRIETTE] You here?

HENRIETTE. Yes, where is Maurice?

ADOLPHE. Do you know--or don't you?

HENRIETTE. I know everything. Excuse me, Madame Catherine, but I
was ready to start and absolutely had to step in here a moment.
[To ADOLPHE] Who is that woman?--Oh!

(HENRIETTE and JEANNE stare at each other.)

(EMILE appears in the kitchen door.)

HENRIETTE. [To JEANNE] I ought to say something, but it matters
very little, for anything I can say must sound like an insult or a
mockery. But if I ask you simply to believe that I share your deep
sorrow as much as anybody standing closer to you, then you must
not turn away from me. You mustn't, for I deserve your pity if not
your forbearance. [Holds out her hand.]

JEANNE. [Looks hard at her] I believe you now--and in the next
moment I don't. [Takes HENRIETTE'S hand.]

HENRIETTE. [Kisses JEANNE'S hand] Thank you!

JEANNE. [Drawing back her hand] Oh, don't! I don't deserve it! I
don't deserve it!

ABBÉ. Pardon me, but while we are gathered here and peace seems to
prevail temporarily at least, won't you, Mademoiselle Henriette,
shed some light into all the uncertainty and darkness surrounding
the main point of accusation? I ask you, as a friend among
friends, to tell us what you meant with all that talk about
killing, and crime, and the Place de Roquette. That your words had
no connection with the death of the child, we have reason to
believe, but it would give us added assurance to hear what you
were really talking about. Won't you tell us?

HENRIETTE. [After a pause] That I cannot tell! No, I cannot!

ADOLPHE. Henriette, do tell! Give us the word that will relieve us
all.

HENRIETTE. I cannot! Don't ask me!

ABBÉ. This is not the work of man!

HENRIETTE. Oh, that this moment had to come! And in this manner!
[To JEANNE] Madame, I swear that I am not guilty of your child's
death. Is that enough?

JEANNE. Enough for us, but not for Justice.

HENRIETTE. Justice! If you knew how true your words are!

ABBÉ. [To HENRIETTE] And if you knew what you were saying just
now!

HENRIETTE. Do you know that better than I?

ABBÉ. Yes, I do.

(HENRIETTE looks fixedly at the ABBÉ.)

ABBÉ. Have no fear, for even if I guess your secret, it will not
be exposed. Besides, I have nothing to do with human justice, but
a great deal with divine mercy.

MAURICE. [Enters hastily, dressed for travelling. He doesn't look
at the others, who are standing in the background, but goes
straight up to the counter, where MME. CATHERINE is sitting.] You
are not angry at me, Madame Catherine, because I didn't show up. I
have come now to apologise to you before I start for the South at
eight o'clock this evening.

(MME. CATHERINE is too startled to say a word.)

MAURICE. Then you are angry at me? [Looks around] What does all
this mean? Is it a dream, or what is it? Of course, I can see that
it is all real, but it looks like a wax cabinet--There is Jeanne,
looking like a statue and dressed in black--And Henriette looking
like a corpse--What does it mean?

(All remain silent.)

MAURICE. Nobody answers. It must mean something dreadful.
[Silence] But speak, please! Adolphe, you are my friend, what is
it? [Pointing to EMILE] And there is a detective!

ADOLPHE. [Comes forward] You don't know then?

MAURICE. Nothing at all. But I must know!

ADOLPHE. Well, then--Marion is dead.

MAURICE. Marion--dead?

ADOLPHE. Yes, she died this morning.

MAURICE. [To JEANNE] So that's why you are in mourning. Jeanne,
Jeanne, who has done this to us?

JEANNE. He who holds life and death in his hand.

MAURICE. But I saw her looking well and happy this morning. How
did it happen? Who did it? Somebody must have done it? [His eyes
seek HENRIETTE.]

ADOLPHE. Don't look for the guilty one here, for there is none to
he found. Unfortunately the police have turned their suspicion in
a direction where none ought to exist.

MAURICE. What direction is that?

ADOLPHE. Well--you may as well know that, your reckless talk last
night and this morning has placed you in a light that is anything
but favourable.

MAURICE, So they were listening to us. Let me see, what were we
saying--I remember!--Then I am lost!

ADOLPHE. But if you explain your thoughtless words we will believe
you.

MAURICE. I cannot! And I will not! I shall be sent to prison, but
it doesn't matter. Marion is dead! Dead! And I have killed her!

(General consternation.)

ADOLPHE. Think of what you are saying! Weigh your words! Do you
realise what you said just now?

MAURICE. What did I say?

ADOLPHE. You said that you had killed Marion.

MAURICE. Is there a human being here who could believe me a
murderer, and who could hold me capable of taking my own child's
life? You who know me, Madame Catherine, tell me: do you believe,
can you believe--

MME. CATHERINE. I don't know any longer what to believe. What the
heart thinketh the tongue speaketh. And your tongue has spoken
evil words.

MAURICE. She doesn't believe me!

ADOLPHE. But explain your words, man! Explain what you meant by
saying that "your love would kill everything that stood in its
way."

MAURICE. So they know that too--Are you willing to explain it,
Henriette?

HENRIETTE. No, I cannot do that.

ABBÉ. There is something wrong behind all this and you have lost
our sympathy, my friend. A while ago I could have sworn that you
were innocent, and I wouldn't do that now.

MAURICE. [To JEANNE] What you have to say means more to me than
anything else. JEANNE. [Coldly] Answer a question first: who was
it you cursed during that orgie out there?

MAURICE. Have I done that too? Maybe. Yes, I am guilty, and yet I
am guiltless. Let me go away from here, for I am ashamed of
myself, and I have done more wrong than I can forgive myself.

HENRIETTE. [To ADOLPHE] Go with him and see that he doesn't do
himself any harm.

ADOLPHE. Shall I--?

HENRIETTE. Who else?

ADOLPHE. [Without bitterness] You are nearest to it--Sh! A
carriage is stopping outside.

MME. CATHERINE. It's the Commissaire. Well, much as I have seen of
life, I could never have believed that success and fame were such
short-lived things.

MAURICE. [To HENRIETTE] From the triumphal chariot to the patrol
wagon!

JEANNE. [Simply] And the ass--who was that?

ADOLPHE. Oh, that must have been me.

COMMISSAIRE. [Enters with a paper in his hand] A summons to Police
Headquarters--to-night, at once--for Monsieur Maurice Gérard--and
for Mademoiselle Henrietta Mauclerc--both here?

MAURICE and HENRIETTE. Yes.

MAURICE. Is this an arrest?

COMMISSAIRE. Not yet. Only a summons.

MAURICE. And then?

COMMISSAIRE. We don't know yet.

(MAURICE and HENRIETTE go toward the door.)

MAURICE. Good-bye to all!

(Everybody shows emotion. The COMMISSAIRE, MAURICE, and HENRIETTE
go out.)

EMILE. [Enters and goes up to JEANNE] Now I'll take you home,
sister.

JEANNE. And what do you think of all this?

EMILE. The man is innocent.

ABBÉ. But as I see it, it is, and must always be, something
despicable to break one's promise, and it becomes unpardonable
when a woman and her child are involved.

EMILE. Well, I should rather feel that way, too, now when it
concerns my own sister, but unfortunately I am prevented from
throwing the first stone because I have done the same thing
myself.

ABBÉ. Although I am free from blame in that respect, I am not
throwing any stones either, but the act condemns itself and is
punished by its consequences.

JEANNE. Pray for him! For both of them!

ABBÉ. No, I'll do nothing of the kind, for it is an impertinence
to want to change the counsels of the Lord. And what has happened
here is, indeed, not the work of man.

(Curtain.)


SECOND SCENE

(The Auberge des Adrets. ADOLPHE and HENRIETTE are seated at the
same table where MAURICE and HENRIETTE were sitting in the second
act. A cup of coffee stands in front of ADOLPHE. HENRIETTE has
ordered nothing.)

ADOLPHE. You believe then that he will come here?

HENRIETTE. I am sure. He was released this noon for lack of
evidence, but he didn't want to show himself in the streets before
it was dark.

ADOLPHE. Poor fellow! Oh, I tell you, life seems horrible to me
since yesterday.

HENRIETTE. And what about me? I am afraid to live, dare hardly
breathe, dare hardly think even, since I know that somebody is
spying not only on my words but on my thoughts.

ADOLPHE. So it was here you sat that night when I couldn't find
you?

HENRIETTE. Yes, but don't talk of it. I could die from shame when
I think of it. Adolphe, you are made of a different, a better,
stuff than he or I--

ADOLPHE. Sh, sh, sh!

HENRIETTE. Yes, indeed! And what was it that made me stay here? I
was lazy; I was tired; his success intoxicated me and bewitched
me--I cannot explain it. But if you had come, it would never have
happened. And to-day you are great, and he is small--less than the
least of all. Yesterday he had one hundred thousand francs. To-day
he has nothing, because his play has been withdrawn. And public
opinion will never excuse him, for his lack of faith will be
judged as harshly as if he were the murderer, and those that see
farthest hold that the child died from sorrow, so that he was
responsible for it anyhow.

ADOLPHE. You know what my thoughts are in this matter, Henriette,
but I should like to know that both of you are spotless. Won't you
tell me what those dreadful words of yours meant? It cannot be a
chance that your talk in a festive moment like that dealt so
largely with killing and the scaffold.

HENRIETTE. It was no chance. It was something that had to be said,
something I cannot tell you--probably because I have no right to
appear spotless in your eyes, seeing that I am not spotless.

ADOLPHE. All this is beyond me.

HENRIETTE. Let us talk of something else--Do you believe there are
many unpunished criminals at large among us, some of whom may even
be our intimate friends?

ADOLPHE. [Nervously] Why? What do you mean?

HENRIETTE. Don't you believe that every human being at some time
or another has been guilty of some kind of act which would fall
under the law if it were discovered?

ADOLPHE. Yes, I believe that is true, but no evil act escapes
being punished by one's own conscience at least. [Rises and
unbuttons his coat] And--nobody is really good who has not erred.
[Breathing heavily] For in order to know how to forgive, one must
have been in need of forgiveness--I had a friend whom we used to
regard as a model man. He never spoke a hard word to anybody; he
forgave everything and everybody; and he suffered insults with a
strange satisfaction that we couldn't explain. At last, late in
life, he gave me his secret in a single word: I am a penitent! [He
sits down again.]

(HENRIETTE remains silent, looking at him with surprise.)

ADOLPHE. [As if speaking to himself] There are crimes not
mentioned in the Criminal Code, and these are the worse ones, for
they have to be punished by ourselves, and no judge could be more
severe than we are against our own selves.

HENRIETTE. [After a pause] Well, that friend of yours, did he find
peace?

ADOLPHE. After endless self-torture he reached a certain degree of
composure, but life had never any real pleasures to offer him. He
never dared to accept any kind of distinction; he never dared to
feel himself entitled to a kind word or even well-earned praise:
in a word, he could never quite forgive himself.

HENRIETTE. Never? What had he done then?

ADOLPHE. He had wished the life out of his father. And when his
father suddenly died, the son imagined himself to have killed him.
Those imaginations were regarded as signs of some mental disease,
and he was sent to an asylum. From this he was discharged after a
time as wholly recovered--as they put it. But the sense of guilt
remained with him, and so he continued to punish himself for his
evil thoughts.

HENRIETTE. Are you sure the evil will cannot kill?

ADOLPHE. You mean in some mystic way?

HENRIETTE. As you please. Let it go at mystic. In my own family--I
am sure that my mother and my sisters killed my father with their
hatred. You see, he had the awful idea that he must oppose all our
tastes and inclinations. Wherever he discovered a natural gift, he
tried to root it out. In that way he aroused a resistance that
accumulated until it became like an electrical battery charged
with hatred. At last it grew so powerful that he languished away,
became depolarised, lost his will-power, and, in the end, came to
wish himself dead.

ADOLPHE. And your conscience never troubled you?

HENRIETTE. No, and furthermore, I don't know what conscience is.

ADOLPHE. You don't? Well, then you'll soon learn. [Pause] How do
you believe Maurice will look when he gets here? What do you think
he will say?

HENRIETTE. Yesterday morning, you know, he and I tried to make the
same kind of guess about you while we were waiting for you.

ADOLPHE. Well?

HENRIETTE. We guessed entirely wrong.

ADOLPHE. Can you tell me why you sent for me?

HENRIETTE. Malice, arrogance, outright cruelty!

ADOLPHE. How strange it is that you can admit your faults and yet
not repent of them.

HENRIETTE. It must be because I don't feel quite responsible for
them. They are like the dirt left behind by things handled during
the day and washed off at night. But tell me one thing: do you
really think so highly of humanity as you profess to do?

ADOLPHE. Yes, we are a little better than our reputation--and a
little worse.

HENRIETTE. That is not a straightforward answer.

ADOLPHE. No, it isn't. But are you willing to answer me frankly
when I ask you: do you still love Maurice?

HENRIETTE. I cannot tell until I see him. But at this moment I
feel no longing for him, and it seems as if I could very well live
without him.

ADOLPHE. It's likely you could, but I fear you have become chained
to his fate--Sh! Here he comes.

HENRIETTE. How everything repeats itself. The situation is the
same, the very words are the same, as when we were expecting you
yesterday.

MAURICE. [Enters, pale as death, hollow-eyed, unshaven] Here I am,
my dear friends, if this be me. For that last night in a cell
changed me into a new sort of being. [Notices HENRIETTE and
ADOLPHE.]

ADOLPHE. Sit down and pull yourself together, and then we can talk
things over.

MAURICE. [To HENRIETTE] Perhaps I am in the way?

ADOLPHE. Now, don't get bitter.

MAURICE. I have grown bad in these twenty-four hours, and
suspicious also, so I guess I'll soon be left to myself. And who
wants to keep company with a murderer?

HENRIETTE. But you have been cleared of the charge.

MAURICE. [Picks up a newspaper] By the police, yes, but not by
public opinion. Here you see the murderer Maurice Gérard, once a
playwright, and his mistress, Henriette Mauclerc--

HENRIETTE. O my mother and my sisters--my mother! Jesus have
mercy!

MAURICE. And can you see that I actually look like a murderer? And
then it is suggested that my play was stolen. So there isn't a
vestige left of the victorious hero from yesterday. In place of my
own, the name of Octave, my enemy, appears on the bill-boards, and
he is going to collect my one hundred thousand francs. O Solon,
Solon! Such is fortune, and such is fame! You are fortunate,
Adolphe, because you have not yet succeeded.

HENRIETTE. So you don't know that Adolphe has made a great success
in London and carried off the first prize?

MAURICE. [Darkly] No, I didn't know that. Is it true, Adolphe?

ADOLPHE. It is true, but I have returned the prize.

HENRIETTE. [With emphasis] That I didn't know! So you are also
prevented from accepting any distinctions--like your friend?

ADOLPHE. My friend? [Embarrassed] Oh, yes, yes!

MAURICE. Your success gives me pleasure, but it puts us still
farther apart.

ADOLPHE. That's what I expected, and I suppose I'll be as lonely
with my success as you with your adversity. Think of it--that
people feel hurt by your fortune! Oh, it's ghastly to be alive!

MAURICE. You say that! What am I then to say? It is as if my eyes
had been covered with a black veil, and as if the colour and shape
of all life had been changed by it. This room looks like the room
I saw yesterday, and yet it is quite different. I recognise both
of you, of course, but your faces are new to me. I sit here and
search for words because I don't know what to say to you. I ought
to defend myself, but I cannot. And I almost miss the cell, for it
protected me, at least, against the curious glances that pass
right through me. The murderer Maurice and his mistress! You don't
love me any longer, Henriette, and no more do I care for you. To-
day you are ugly, clumsy, insipid, repulsive.

(Two men in civilian clothes have quietly seated themselves at a
table in the background.)

ADOLPHE. Wait a little and get your thoughts together. That you
have been discharged and cleared of all suspicion must appear in
some of the evening papers. And that puts an end to the whole
matter. Your play will be put on again, and if it comes to the
worst, you can write a new one. Leave Paris for a year and let
everything become forgotten. You who have exonerated mankind will
be exonerated yourself.

MAURICE. Ha-ha! Mankind! Ha-ha!

ADOLPHE. You have ceased to believe in goodness? MAURICE. Yes, if
I ever did believe in it. Perhaps it was only a mood, a manner of
looking at things, a way of being polite to the wild beasts. When
I, who was held among the best, can be so rotten to the core, what
must then be the wretchedness of the rest?

ADOLPHE. Now I'll go out and get all the evening papers, and then
we'll undoubtedly have reason to look at things in a different
way.

MAURICE. [Turning toward the background] Two detectives!--It means
that I am released under surveillance, so that I can give myself
away by careless talking.

ADOLPHE. Those are not detectives. That's only your imagination. I
recognise both of them. [Goes toward the door.]

MAURICE. Don't leave us alone, Adolphe. I fear that Henriette and
I may come to open explanations.

ADOLPHE. Oh, be sensible, Maurice, and think of your future. Try
to keep him quiet, Henriette. I'll be back in a moment. [Goes
out.]

HENRIETTE. Well, Maurice, what do you think now of our guilt or
guiltlessness?

MAURICE. I have killed nobody. All I did was to talk a lot of
nonsense while I was drunk. But it is your crime that comes back,
and that crime you have grafted on to me.

HENRIETTE. Oh, that's the tone you talk in now!--Was it not you
who cursed your own child, and wished the life out of it, and
wanted to go away without saying good-bye to anybody? And was it
not I who made you visit Marion and show yourself to Madame
Catherine?

MAURICE. Yes, you are right. Forgive me! You proved yourself more
human than I, and the guilt is wholly my own. Forgive me! But all
the same I am without guilt. Who has tied this net from which I
can never free myself? Guilty and guiltless; guiltless and yet
guilty! Oh, it is driving me mad--Look, now they sit over there
and listen to us--And no waiter comes to take our order. I'll go
out and order a cup of tea. Do you want anything?

HENRIETTE. Nothing.

(MAURICE goes out.)

FIRST DETECTIVE. [Goes up to HENRIETTE] Let me look at your
papers.

HENRIETTE. How dare you speak to me?

DETECTIVE. Dare? I'll show you!

HENRIETTE. What do you mean?

DETECTIVE. It's my job to keep an eye on street-walkers. Yesterday
you came here with one man, and today with another. That's as good
as walking the streets. And unescorted ladies don't get anything
here. So you'd better get out and come along with me.

HENRIETTE. My escort will be back in a moment.

DETECTIVE. Yes, and a pretty kind of escort you've got--the kind
that doesn't help a girl a bit!

HENRIETTE. O God! My mother, my sisters!--I am of good family, I
tell you.

DETECTIVE. Yes, first-rate family, I am sure. But you are too well
known through the papers. Come along!

HENRIETTE. Where? What do you mean?

DETECTIVE. Oh, to the Bureau, of course. There you'll get a nice
little card and a license that brings you free medical care.

HENRIETTE. O Lord Jesus, you don't mean it!

DETECTIVE. [Grabbing HENRIETTE by the arm] Don't I mean it?

HENRIETTE. [Falling on her knees] Save me, Maurice! Help!

DETECTIVE. Shut up, you fool!

(MAURICE enters, followed by WAITER.)

WAITER. Gentlemen of that kind are not served here. You just pay
and get out! And take the girl along!

MAURICE. [Crushed, searches his pocket-book for money] Henriette,
pay for me, and let us get away from this place. I haven't a sou
left.

WAITER. So the lady has to put up for her Alphonse! Alphonse! Do
you know what that is?

HENRIETTE. [Looking through her pocket-book] Oh, merciful heavens!
I have no money either!--Why doesn't Adolphe come back?

DETECTIVE. Well, did you ever see such rotters! Get out of here,
and put up something as security. That kind of ladies generally
have their fingers full of rings.

MAURICE. Can it be possible that we have sunk so low?

HENRIETTE. [Takes off a ring and hands it to the WAITER] The Abbé
was right: this is not the work of man.

MAURICE. No, it's the devil's!--But if we leave before Adolphe
returns, he will think that we have deceived him and run away.

HENRIETTE. That would be in keeping with the rest--But we'll go
into the river now, won't we?

MAURICE. [Takes HENRIETTE by the hand as they walk out together]
Into the river--yes!

(Curtain.)


ACT IV

FIRST SCENE

(In the Luxembourg Gardens, at the group of Adam and Eve. The wind
is shaking the trees and stirring up dead leaves, straws, and
pieces of paper from the ground.)

(MAURICE and HENRIETTE are seated on a bench.)

HENRIETTE. So you don't want to die?

MAURICE. No, I am afraid. I imagine that I am going to be very
cold down there in the grave, with only a sheet to cover me and a
few shavings to lie on. And besides that, it seems to me as if
there were still some task waiting for me, but I cannot make out
what it is.

HENRIETTE. But I can guess what it is.

MAURICE. Tell me.

HENRIETTE. It is revenge. You, like me, must have suspected Jeanne
and Emile of sending the detectives after me yesterday. Such a
revenge on a rival none but a woman could devise.

MAURICE. Exactly what I was thinking. But let me tell you that my
suspicions go even further. It seems as if my sufferings during
these last few days had sharpened my wits. Can you explain, for
instance, why the waiter from the Auberge des Adrets and the head
waiter from the Pavilion were not called to testify at the
hearing?

HENRIETTE. I never thought of it before. But now I know why. They
had nothing to tell, because they had not been listening.

MAURICE. But how could the Commissaire then know what we had been
saying?

HENRIETTE. He didn't know, but he figured it out. He was guessing,
and he guessed right. Perhaps he had had to deal with some similar
case before.

MAURICE. Or else he concluded from our looks what we had been
saying. There are those who can read other people's thoughts--
Adolphe being the dupe, it seemed quite natural that we should
have called him an ass. It's the rule, I understand, although it's
varied at times by the use of "idiot" instead. But ass was nearer
at hand in this case, as we had been talking of carriages and
triumphal chariots. It is quite simple to figure out a fourth
fact, when you have three known ones to start from.

HENRIETTE. Just think that we have let ourselves be taken in so
completely.

MAURICE. That's the result of thinking too well of one's fellow
beings. This is all you get out of it. But do you know, _I_
suspect somebody else back of the Commissaire, who, by-the-bye,
must be a full-fledged scoundrel.

HENRIETTE. You mean the Abbé, who was taking the part of a private
detective.

MAURICE. That's what I mean. That man has to receive all kinds of
confessions. And note you: Adolphe himself told us he had been at
the Church of St. Germain that morning. What was he doing there?
He was blabbing, of course, and bewailing his fate. And then the
priest put the questions together for the Commissaire.

HENRIETTE. Tell me something: do you trust Adolphe?

MAURICE. I trust no human being any longer.

HENRIETTE. Not even Adolphe?

MAURICE. Him least of all. How could I trust an enemy--a man from
whom I have taken away his mistress?

HENRIETTE. Well, as you were the first one to speak of this, I'll
give you some data about our friend. You heard he had returned
that medal from London. Do you know his reason for doing so?

MAURICE. No.

HENRIETTE. He thinks himself unworthy of it, and he has taken a
penitential vow never to receive any kind of distinction.

MAURICE. Can that he possible? But what has he done?

HENRIETTE. He has committed a crime of the kind that is not
punishable under the law. That's what he gave me to understand
indirectly.

MAURICE. He, too! He, the best one of all, the model man, who
never speaks a hard word of anybody and who forgives everything.

HENRIETTE. Well, there you can see that we are no worse than
others. And yet we are being hounded day and night as if devils
were after us.

MAURICE. He, also! Then mankind has not been slandered--But if he
has been capable of _one_ crime, then you may expect anything of
him. Perhaps it was he who sent the police after you yesterday.
Coming to think of it now, it was he who sneaked away from us when
he saw that we were in the papers, and he lied when he insisted
that those fellows were not detectives. But, of course, you may
expect anything from a deceived lover.

HENRIETTE. Could he be as mean as that? No, it is impossible,
impossible!

MAURICE. Why so? If he is a scoundrel?--What were you two talking
of yesterday, before I came?

HENRIETTE. He had nothing but good to say of you.

MAURICE. That's a lie!

HENRIETTE. [Controlling herself and changing her tone] Listen.
There is one person on whom you have cast no suspicion whatever--
for what reason, I don't know. Have you thought of Madame
Catherine's wavering attitude in this matter? Didn't she say
finally that she believed you capable of anything?

MAURICE. Yes, she did, and that shows what kind of person she is.
To think evil of other people without reason, you must be a
villain yourself.

(HENRIETTE looks hard at him. Pause.)

HENRIETTE. To think evil of others, you must be a villain
yourself.

MAURICE. What do you mean?

HENRIETTE. What I said.

MAURICE. Do you mean that I--?

HENRIETTE. Yes, that's what I mean now! Look here! Did you meet
anybody but Marion when you called there yesterday morning?

MAURICE. Why do you ask?

HENRIETTE. Guess!

MAURICE. Well, as you seem to know--I met Jeanne, too.

HENRIETTE. Why did you lie to me?

MAURICE. I wanted to spare you.

HENRIETTE. And now you want me to believe in one who has been
lying to me? No, my boy, now I believe you guilty of that murder.

MAURICE. Wait a moment! We have now reached the place for which my
thoughts have been heading all the time, though I resisted as long
as possible. It's queer that what lies next to one is seen last of
all, and what one doesn't _want_ to believe cannot be believed--Tell
me something: where did you go yesterday morning, after we parted
in the Bois?

HENRIETTE. [Alarmed] Why?

MAURICE. You went either to Adolphe--which you couldn't do, as he
was attending a lesson--or you went to--Marion!

HENRIETTE. Now I am convinced that you are the murderer.

MAURICE. And I, that you are the murderess! You alone had an
interest in getting the child out of the way--to get rid of the
rock on the road, as you so aptly put it.

HENRIETTE. It was you who said that.

MAURICE. And the one who had an interest in it must have committed
the crime.

HENRIETTE. Now, Maurice, we have been running around and around in
this tread-mill, scourging each other. Let us quit before we get
to the point of sheer madness.

MAURICE. You have reached that point already.

HENRIETTE. Don't you think it's time for us to part, before we
drive each other insane?

MAURICE. Yes, I think so.

HENRIETTE. [Rising] Good-bye then!

(Two men in civilian clothes become visible in the background.)

HENRIETTE. [Turns and comes back to MAURICE] There they are again!

MAURICE. The dark angels that want to drive us out of the garden.

HENRIETTE. And force us back upon each other as if we were chained
together.

MAURICE. Or as if we were condemned to lifelong marriage. Are we
really to marry? To settle down in the same place? To be able to
close the door behind us and perhaps get peace at last?

HENRIETTE. And shut ourselves up in order to torture each other to
death; get behind locks and bolts, with a ghost for marriage
portion; you torturing me with the memory of Adolphe, and I
getting back at you with Jeanne--and Marion.

MAURICE. Never mention the name of Marion again! Don't you know
that she was to be buried today--at this very moment perhaps?

HENRIETTE. And you are not there? What does that mean?

MAURICE. It means that both Jeanne and the police have warned me
against the rage of the people.

HENRIETTE. A coward, too?

MAURICE. All the vices! How could you ever have cared for me?

HENRIETTE. Because two days ago you were another person, well
worthy of being loved--

MAURICE. And now sunk to such a depth!

HENRIETTE. It isn't that. But you are beginning to flaunt bad
qualities which are not your own.

MAURICE. But yours?

HENRIETTE. Perhaps, for when you appear a little worse I feel
myself at once a little better.

MAURICE. It's like passing on a disease to save one's self-
respect.

HENRIETTE. And how vulgar you have become, too!

MAURICE. Yes, I notice it myself, and I hardly recognise myself
since that night in the cell. They put in one person and let out
another through that gate which separates us from the rest of
society. And now I feel myself the enemy of all mankind: I should
like to set fire to the earth and dry up the oceans, for nothing
less than a universal conflagration can wipe out my dishonour.

HENRIETTE. I had a letter from my mother today. She is the widow
of a major in the army, well educated, with old-fashioned ideas of
honour and that kind of thing. Do you want to read the letter? No,
you don't!--Do you know that I am an outcast? My respectable
acquaintances will have nothing to do with me, and if I show
myself on the streets alone the police will take me. Do you
realise now that we have to get married?

MAURICE. We despise each other, and yet we have to marry: that is
hell pure and simple! But, Henriette, before we unite our
destinies you must tell me your secret, so that we may be on more
equal terms.

HENRIETTE. All right, I'll tell you. I had a friend who got into
trouble--you understand. I wanted to help her, as her whole future
was at stake--and she died!

MAURICE. That was reckless, but one might almost call it noble,
too.

HENRIETTE. You say so now, but the next time you lose your temper
you will accuse me of it.

MAURICE. No, I won't. But I cannot deny that it has shaken my
faith in you and that it makes me afraid of you. Tell me, is her
lover still alive, and does he know to what extent you were
responsible?

HENRIETTE. He was as guilty as I.

MAURICE. And if his conscience should begin to trouble him--such
things do happen--and if he should feel inclined to confess: then
you would be lost.

HENRIETTE. I know it, and it is this constant dread which has made
me rush from one dissipation to another--so that I should never
have time to wake up to full consciousness.

MAURICE. And now you want me to take my marriage portion out of
your dread. That's asking a little too much.

HENRIETTE. But when I shared the shame of Maurice the murderer--

MAURICE. Oh, let's come to an end with it!

HENRIETTE. No, the end is not yet, and I'll not let go my hold
until I have put you where you belong. For you can't go around
thinking yourself better than I am.

MAURICE. So you want to fight me then? All right, as you please!

HENRIETTE. A fight on life and death!

(The rolling of drums is heard in the distance.)

MAURICE. The garden is to be closed. "Cursed is the ground for thy
sake; thorns and thistles shall it bring forth to thee."

HENRIETTE. "And the Lord God said unto the woman--"

A GUARD. [In uniform, speaking very politely] Sorry, but the
garden has to be closed.

(Curtain.)


SECOND SCENE

(The Crêmerie. MME. CATHERINE is sitting at the counter making
entries into an account book. ADOLPHE and HENRIETTE are seated at
a table.)

ADOLPHE. [Calmly and kindly] But if I give you my final assurance
that I didn't run away, but that, on the contrary, I thought you
had played me false, this ought to convince you.

HENRIETTE. But why did you fool us by saying that those fellows
were not policemen?

ADOLPHE. I didn't think myself that they were, and then I wanted
to reassure you.

HENRIETTE. When you say it, I believe you. But then you must also
believe me, if I reveal my innermost thoughts to you.

ADOLPHE. Go on.

HENRIETTE. But you mustn't come back with your usual talk of
fancies and delusions.

ADOLPHE. You seem to have reason to fear that I may.

HENRIETTE. I fear nothing, but I know you and your scepticism--
Well, and then you mustn't tell this to anybody--promise me!

ADOLPHE. I promise.

HENRIETTE. Now think of it, although I must say it's something
terrible: I have partial evidence that Maurice is guilty, or at
least, I have reasonable suspicions--

ADOLPHE. You don't mean it!

HENRIETTE. Listen, and judge for yourself. When Maurice left me in
the Bois, he said he was going to see Marion alone, as the mother
was out. And now I have discovered afterward that he did meet the
mother. So that he has been lying to me.

ADOLPHE. That's possible, and his motive for doing so may have
been the best, but how can anybody conclude from it that he is
guilty of a murder?

HENRIETTE. Can't you see that?--Don't you understand?

ADOLPHE. Not at all.

HENRIETTE. Because you don't want to!--Then there is nothing left
for me but to report him, and we'll see whether he can prove an
alibi.

ADOLPHE. Henriette, let me tell you the grim truth. You, like he,
have reached the border line of--insanity. The demons of distrust
have got hold of you, and each of you is using his own sense of
partial guilt to wound the other with. Let me see if I can make a
straight guess: he has also come to suspect you of killing his
child?

HENRIETTE. Yes, he's mad enough to do so.

ADOLPHE. You call his suspicions mad, but not your own.

HENRIETTE. You have first to prove the contrary, or that I suspect
him unjustly.

ADOLPHE. Yes, that's easy. A new autopsy has proved that Marion
died of a well-known disease, the queer name of which I cannot
recall just now.

HENRIETTE. Is it true?

ADOLPHE. The official report is printed in today's paper.

HENRIETTE. I don't take any stock in it. They can make up that
kind of thing.

ADOLPHE. Beware, Henriette--or you may, without knowing it, pass
across that border line. Beware especially of throwing out
accusations that may put you into prison. Beware! [He places his
hand on her head] You hate Maurice?

HENRIETTE. Beyond all bounds!

ADOLPHE. When love turns into hatred, it means that it was tainted
from the start.

HENRIETTE. [In a quieter mood] What am I to do? Tell me, you who
are the only one that understands me.

ADOLPHE. But you don't want any sermons.

HENRIETTE. Have you nothing else to offer me?

ADOLPHE. Nothing else. But they have helped me.

HENRIETTE. Preach away then!

ADOLPHE. Try to turn your hatred against yourself. Put the knife
to the evil spot in yourself, for it is there that _your_ trouble
roots.

HENRIETTE. Explain yourself.

ADOLPHE. Part from Maurice first of all, so that you cannot nurse
your qualms of conscience together. Break off your career as an
artist, for the only thing that led you into it was a craving for
freedom and fun--as they call it. And you have seen now how much
fun there is in it. Then go home to your mother.

HENRIETTE. Never!

ADOLPHE. Some other place then.

HENRIETTE. I suppose you know, Adolphe, that I have guessed your
secret and why you wouldn't accept the prize?

ADOLPHE. Oh, I assumed that you would understand a half-told
story.

HENRIETTE. Well--what did you do to get peace?

ADOLPHE. What I have suggested: I became conscious of my guilt,
repented, decided to turn over a new leaf, and arranged my life
like that of a penitent.

HENRIETTE. How can you repent when, like me, you have no
conscience? Is repentance an act of grace bestowed on you as faith
is?

ADOLPHE. Everything is a grace, but it isn't granted unless you
seek it--Seek!

(HENRIETTE remains silent.)

ADOLPHE. But don't wait beyond the allotted time, or you may
harden yourself until you tumble down into the irretrievable.

HENRIETTE. [After a pause] Is conscience fear of punishment?

ADOLPHE. No, it is the horror inspired in our better selves by the
misdeeds of our lower selves.

HENRIETTE. Then I must have a conscience also?

ADOLPHE. Of course you have, but--

HENRIETTE, Tell me, Adolphe, are you what they call religious?

ADOLPHE. Not the least bit.

HENRIETTE. It's all so queer--What is religion?

ADOLPHE. Frankly speaking, I don't know! And I don't think anybody
else can tell you. Sometimes it appears to me like a punishment,
for nobody becomes religious without having a bad conscience.

HENRIETTE. Yes, it is a punishment. Now I know what to do.
Good-bye, Adolphe!

ADOLPHE. You'll go away from here?

HENRIETTE. Yes, I am going--to where you said. Good-bye my friend!
Good-bye, Madame Catherine!

MME. CATHERINE. Have you to go in such a hurry?

HENRIETTE. Yes.

ADOLPHE. Do you want me to go with you?

HENRIETTE. No, it wouldn't do. I am going alone, alone as I came
here, one day in Spring, thinking that I belonged where I don't
belong, and believing there was something called freedom, which
does not exist. Good-bye! [Goes out.]

MME. CATHERINE. I hope that lady never comes back, and I wish she
had never come here at all!

ADOLPHE. Who knows but that she may have had some mission to fill
here? And at any rate she deserves pity, endless pity.

MME. CATHERINE. I don't, deny it, for all of us deserve that.

ADOLPHE. And she has even done less wrong than the rest of us.

MME. CATHERINE. That's possible, but not probable.

ADOLPHE. You are always so severe, Madame Catherine. Tell me: have
you never done anything wrong?

MME. CATHERINE. [Startled] Of course, as I am a sinful human creature.
But if you have been on thin ice and fallen in, you have a right to
tell others to keep away. And you may do so without being held severe
or uncharitable. Didn't I say to Monsieur Maurice the moment that lady
entered here: Look out! Keep away! And he didn't, and so he fell in. Just
like a naughty, self-willed child. And when a man acts like that he has
to have a spanking, like any disobedient youngster.

ADOLPHE. Well, hasn't he had his spanking?

MME. CATHERINE. Yes, but it does not seem to have been enough, as
he is still going around complaining.

ADOLPHE. That's a very popular interpretation of the whole
intricate question.

MME. CATHERINE. Oh, pish! You do nothing but philosophise about
your vices, and while you are still at it the police come along
and solve the riddle. Now please leave me alone with my accounts!

ADOLPHE. There's Maurice now.

MME. CATHERINE. Yes, God bless him!

MAURICE. [Enters, his face very flushed, and takes a seat near
ADOLPHE] Good evening.

(MME. CATHERINE nods and goes on figuring.)

ADOLPHE. Well, how's everything with you?

MAURICE. Oh, beginning to clear up.

ADOLPHE. [Hands him a newspaper, which MAURICE does not take] So
you have read the paper?

MAURICE. No, I don't read the papers any longer. There's nothing
but infamies in them.

ADOLPHE. But you had better read it first--

MAURICE. No, I won't! It's nothing but lies--But listen: I have
found a new clue. Can you guess who committed that murder?

ADOLPHE. Nobody, nobody!

MAURICE. Do you know where Henriette was during that quarter hour
when the child was left alone?--She was _there_! And it is she who
has done it!

ADOLPHE. You are crazy, man.

MAURICE. Not I, but Henriette, is crazy. She suspects me and has
threatened to report me.

ADOLPHE. Henriette was here a while ago, and she used the self-
same words as you. Both of you are crazy, for it has been proved
by a second autopsy that the child died from a well-known disease,
the name of which I have forgotten.

MAURICE. It isn't true!

ADOLPHE. That's what she said also. But the official report is
printed in the paper.

MAURICE. A report? Then they have made it up!

ADOLPHE. And that's also what she said. The two of you are
suffering from the same mental trouble. But with her I got far
enough to make her realise her own condition.

MAURICE. Where did she go?

ADOLPHE. She went far away from here to begin a new life.

MAURICE. Hm, hm!--Did you go to the funeral?

ADOLPHE. I did.

MAURICE. Well?

ADOLPHE. Well, Jeanne seemed resigned and didn't have a hard word
to say about you.

MAURICE. She is a good woman.

ADOLPHE. Why did you desert her then?

MAURICE. Because I _was_ crazy--blown up with pride especially--and
then we had been drinking champagne--

ADOLPHE. Can you understand now why Jeanne wept when you drank
champagne?

MAURICE. Yes, I understand now--And for that reason I have already
written to her and asked her to forgive me--Do you think she will
forgive me?

ADOLPHE. I think so, for it's not like her to hate anybody.

MAURICE. Do you think she will forgive me completely, so that she
will come back to me?

ADOLPHE. Well, I don't know about _that_. You have shown yourself so
poor in keeping faith that it is doubtful whether she will trust
her fate to you any longer.

MAURICE. But I can feel that her fondness for me has not ceased,
and I know she will come back to me.

ADOLPHE. How can you know that? How can you believe it? Didn't you
even suspect her and that decent brother of hers of having sent
the police after Henriette out of revenge?

MAURICE. But I don't believe it any longer--that is to say, I
guess that fellow Emile is a pretty slick customer.

MME. CATHERINE. Now look here! What are you saying of Monsieur
Emile? Of course, he is nothing but a workman, but if everybody
kept as straight as he--There is no flaw in him, but a lot of
sense and tact.

EMILE. [Enters] Monsieur Gérard?

MAURICE. That's me.

EMILE. Pardon me, but I have something to say to you in private.

MAURICE. Go right on. We are all friends here.

(The ABBÉ enters and sits down.)

EMILE. [With a glance at the ABBÉ] Perhaps after--

MAURICE. Never mind. The Abbé is also a friend, although he and I
differ.

EMILE. You know who I am, Monsieur Gérard? My sister has asked me
to give you this package as an answer to your letter.

(MAURICE takes the package and opens it.)

EMILE. And now I have only to add, seeing as I am in a way my
sister's guardian, that, on her behalf as well as my own, I
acknowledge you free of all obligations, now when the natural tie
between you does not exist any longer.

MAURICE. But you must have a grudge against me?

EMILE. Must I? I can't see why. On the other hand, I should like
to have a declaration from you, here in the presence of your
friends, that you don't think either me or my sister capable of
such a meanness as to send the police after Mademoiselle
Henriette.

MAURICE. I wish to take back what I said, and I offer you my
apology, if you will accept it.

EMILE. It is accepted. And I wish all of you a good evening. [Goes
out.]

EVERYBODY. Good evening!

MAURICE. The tie and the gloves which Jeanne gave me for the
opening night of my play, and which I let Henrietta throw into the
fireplace. Who can have picked them up? Everything is dug up;
everything comes back!--And when she gave them to me in the
cemetery, she said she wanted me to look fine and handsome, so
that other people would like me also--And she herself stayed at
home--This hurt her too deeply, and well it might. I have no right
to keep company with decent human beings. Oh, have I done this?
Scoffed at a gift coming from a good heart; scorned a sacrifice
offered to my own welfare. This was what I threw away in order to
get--a laurel that is lying on the rubbish heap, and a bust that
would have belonged in the pillory--Abbé, now I come over to you.

ABBÉ. Welcome!

MAURICE. Give me the word that I need.

ABBÉ. Do you expect me to contradict your self-accusations and
inform you that you have done nothing wrong?

MAURICE. Speak the right word!

ABBÉ. With your leave, I'll say then that I have found your
behaviour just as abominable as you have found it yourself.

MAURICE. What can I do, what can I do, to get out of this?

ABBÉ. You know as well as I do.

MAURICE. No, I know only that I am lost, that my life is spoiled,
my career cut off, my reputation in this world ruined forever.

ABBÉ. And so you are looking for a new existence in some better
world, which you are now beginning to believe in?

MAURICE. Yes, that's it.

ABBÉ. You have been living in the flesh and you want now to live
in the spirit. Are you then so sure that this world has no more
attractions for you?

MAURICE. None whatever! Honour is a phantom; gold, nothing but dry
leaves; women, mere intoxicants. Let me hide myself behind your
consecrated walls and forget this horrible dream that has filled
two days and lasted two eternities.

ABBÉ. All right! But this is not the place to go into the matter
more closely. Let us make an appointment for this evening at nine
o'clock in the Church of St. Germain. For I am going to preach to
the inmates of St. Lazare, and that may be your first step along
the hard road of penitence.

MAURICE. Penitence?

ABBÉ. Well, didn't you wish--

MAURICE. Yes, yes!

ABBÉ. Then we have vigils between midnight and two o'clock.

MAURICE. That will be splendid!

ABBÉ. Give me your hand that you will not look back.

MAURICE. [Rising, holds out his hand] Here is my hand, and my will
goes with it.

SERVANT GIRL. [Enters from the kitchen] A telephone call for
Monsieur Maurice.

MAURICE. From whom?

SERVANT GIRL. From the theatre.

(MAURICE tries to get away, but the ABBÉ holds on to his hand.)

ABBÉ. [To the SERVANT GIRL] Find out what it is.

SERVANT GIRL. They want to know if Monsieur Maurice is going to
attend the performance tonight.

ABBÉ. [To MAURICE, who is trying to get away] No, I won't let you
go.

MAURICE. What performance is that?

ADOLPHE. Why don't you read the paper?

MME. CATHERINE and the ABBÉ. He hasn't read the paper?

MAURICE. It's all lies and slander. [To the SERVANT GIRL] Tell
them that I am engaged for this evening: I am going to church.

(The SERVANT GIRL goes out into the kitchen.)

ADOLPHE. As you don't want to read the paper, I shall have to tell
you that your play has been put on again, now when you are
exonerated. And your literary friends have planned a demonstration
for this evening in recognition of your indisputable talent.

MAURICE. It isn't true.

EVERYBODY. It is true.

MAURICE. [After a pause] I have not deserved it!

ABBÉ. Good!

ADOLPHE. And furthermore, Maurice--

MAURICE. [Hiding his face in his hands] Furthermore!

MME. CATHERINE. One hundred thousand francs! Do you see now that
they come back to you? And the villa outside the city. Everything
is coming back except Mademoiselle Henriette.

ABBÉ. [Smiling] You ought to take this matter a little more
seriously, Madame Catherine.

MME. CATHERINE. Oh, I cannot--I just can't keep serious any
longer!

[She breaks into open laughter, which she vainly tries to smother
with her handkerchief.]

ADOLPHE. Say, Maurice, the play begins at eight.

ABBÉ. But the church services are at nine.

ADOLPHE. Maurice!

MME. CATHERINE. Let us hear what the end is going to be, Monsieur
Maurice.

(MAURICE drops his head on the table, in his arms.)

ADOLPHE. Loose him, Abbé!

ABBÉ. No, it is not for me to loose or bind. He must do that
himself.

MAURICE. [Rising] Well, I go with the Abbé.

ABBÉ. No, my young friend. I have nothing to give you but a
scolding, which you can give yourself. And you owe a duty to
yourself and to your good name. That you have got through with
this as quickly as you have is to me a sign that you have suffered
your punishment as intensely as if it had lasted an eternity. And
when Providence absolves you there is nothing for me to add.

MAURICE. But why did the punishment have to be so hard when I was
innocent?

ABBÉ. Hard? Only two days! And you were not innocent. For we have
to stand responsible for our thoughts and words and desires also.
And in your thought you became a murderer when your evil self
wished the life out of your child.

MAURICE. You are right. But my decision is made. To-night I will
meet you at the church in order to have a reckoning with myself--
but to-morrow evening I go to the theatre.

MME. CATHERINE. A good solution, Monsieur Maurice.

ADOLPHE. Yes, that is the solution. Whew!

ABBÉ. Yes, so it is!

(Curtain.)




MISS JULIA

INTRODUCTION

The volume containing the translation of "There Are Crimes and
Crimes" had barely reached the public when word came across the
ocean that August Strindberg had ended his long fight with life.
His family had long suspected some serious organic trouble. Early
in the year, when lie had just recovered from an illness of
temporary character, their worst fears became confirmed. An
examination disclosed a case of cancer in the stomach, and the
disease progressed so rapidly that soon all hope of recovery was
out of the question. On May 14, 1912, Strindberg died.

With his death peace came in more senses than one. All the fear and
hatred which he had incurred by what was best as well as worst in
him seemed to be laid at rest with his own worn-out body. The love
and the admiration which he had son in far greater measure were
granted unchecked expression. His burial, otherwise as simple as he
himself had prescribed, was a truly national event. At the grave of
the arch-rebel appeared a royal prince as official representative
of the reigning house, the entire cabinet, and numerous members of
the Riksdag. Thousands of men and women representing the best of
Sweden's intellectual and artistic life went to the cemetery,
though the hour of the funeral was eight o'clock in the morning. It
was an event in which the masses and the classes shared a common
sorrow, the standards of student organizations mingling with the
banners of labour unions. And not only the capital, but the whole
country, observed the day as one of mourning.

A thought frequently recurring in the comment passed on Strindberg's
death by the European press was that, in some mysterious manner,
he, more than any other writer, appeared to be the incarnation of
the past century, with its nervous striving after truth, its fear
of being duped, and its fretting dread that evolution and progress
might prove antagonistic terms. And at that simple grave in
Stockholm more than one bareheaded spectator must have heard the
gravel rattle on the coffin-lid with a feeling that not only a
great individual, but a whole human period--great in spite of all
its weaknesses--was being laid away for ever.


Among more than half a hundred plays produced by Strindberg during
his lifetime, none has won such widespread attention as "Miss
Julia," both on account of its masterful construction and its
gripping theme. Whether liking or disliking it, critics have
repeatedly compared it with Ibsen's "Ghosts," and not always to the
advantage of the latter work. It represents, first of all, its
author's most determined and most daring endeavour to win the
modern stage for Naturalism. If he failed in this effort, it must
be recalled to his honour that he was among the first to proclaim
his own failure and to advocate the seeking of new paths. When the
work was still hot from his hands, however, he believed in it with
all the fervour of which his spirit was capable, and to bring home
its lesson the more forcibly, he added a preface, a sort of
dramatic creed, explaining just what he had tried to do, and why.
This preface, which has become hardly less famous than the play
itself, is here, as I believe, for the first time rendered into
English. The acuteness and exhaustiveness of its analysis serves
not only to make it a psychological document of rare value, but
also to save me much of the comment which without it might be
deemed needful.

Years later, while engaged in conducting a theatre for the exclusive
performance of his own plays at Stockholm, Strindberg formulated a
new dramatic creed--that of his mystical period, in which he was
wont to sign himself "the author of 'Gustavus Vasa,' 'The Dream
Play,' 'The Last Knight,' etc." It took the form of a pamphlet
entitled "A Memorandum to the Members of the Intimate Theatre from
the Stage Director" (Stockholm, 1908). There he gave the following
data concerning "Miss Julia," and the movement which that play
helped to start:

"In the '80's the new time began to extend its demands for reform
to the stage also. Zola declared war against the French comedy,
with its Brussels carpets, its patent-leather shoes and
patent-leather themes, and its dialogue reminding one of the
questions and answers of the Catechism. In 1887 Antoine opened his
Théâtre Libre at Paris, and 'Thérèse Raquin,' although nothing but
an adapted novel, became the dominant model. It was the powerful
theme and the concentrated form that showed innovation, although
the unity of time was not yet observed, and curtain falls were
retained. It was then I wrote my dramas: 'Miss Julia,' 'The
Father,' and 'Creditors.'

"'Miss Julia,' which was equipped with a now well-known preface,
was staged by Antoine, but not until 1892 or 1893, having previously
been played by the Students' Association of the Copenhagen
University in 1888 or 1889. In the spring of 1893 'Creditors' was
put on at the Théâtre L'OEuvre, in Paris, and in the fall of the
same year 'The Father' was given at the same theatre, with Philippe
Garnier in the title part.

"But as early as 1889 the Freie Bühne had been started at Berlin,
and before 1893 all three of my dramas had been performed. 'Miss
Julia' was preceded by a lecture given by Paul Schlenther, now
director of the Hofburg Theater at Vienna. The principal parts were
played by Rosa Bertens, Emanuel Reicher, Rittner and Jarno. And
Sigismund Lautenburg, director of the Residenz Theater, gave more
than one hundred performances of 'Creditors.'

"Then followed a period of comparative silence, and the drama sank
back into the old ruts, until, with the beginning of the new
century, Reinhardt opened his Kleines Theater. There I was played
from the start, being represented by the long one-act drama 'The
Link,' as well as by 'Miss Julia' (with Eysoldt in the title part),
and 'There Are Crimes and Crimes.'"

He went on to tell how one European city after another had got its
"Little," or "Free," or "Intimate" theatre. And had he known of it,
he might have added that the promising venture started by Mr.
Winthrop Ames at New York comes as near as any one of its earlier
rivals in the faithful embodiment of those theories which, with
Promethean rashness, he had flung at the head of a startled world in
1888. For the usual thing has happened: what a quarter-century ago
seemed almost ludicrous in its radicalism belongs to-day to the
established traditions of every progressive stage.

Had Strindberg been content with his position of 1888, many honours
now withheld might have fallen to his share. But like Ibsen, he was
first and last--and to the very last!--an innovator, a leader of
human thought and human endeavour. And so it happened that when the
rest thought to have overtaken him, he had already hurried on to a
more advanced position, heedless of the scorn poured on him by
those to whom "consistency" is the foremost of all human virtues.
Three years before his death we find him writing as follows in
another pamphlet "An Open Letter to the Intimate Theatre,"
Stockholm, 1909--of the position once assumed so proudly and so
confidently by himself:

"As the Intimate Theatre counts its inception from the successful
performance of 'Miss Julia' in 1900, it was quite natural that the
young director (August Falck) should feel the influence of the
Preface, which recommended a search for actuality. But that was
twenty years ago, and although I do not feel the need of attacking
myself in this connection, I cannot but regard all that pottering
with stage properties as useless."


It has been customary in this country to speak of the play now
presented to the public as "Countess Julie." The noble title is, of
course, picturesque, but incorrect and unwarranted. It is, I fear,
another outcome of that tendency to exploit the most sensational
elements in Strindberg's art which has caused somebody to translate
the name of his first great novel as "The Scarlet Room,"--instead
of simply "The Red Room,"--thus hoping to connect it in the reader's
mind with the scarlet woman of the Bible.

In Sweden, a countess is the wife or widow of a count. His daughter
is no more a countess than is the daughter of an English earl. Her
title is that of "Fröken," which corresponds exactly to the German
"Fräulein" and the English "Miss." Once it was reserved for the
young women of the nobility. By an agitation which shook all Sweden
with mingled fury and mirth, it became extended to all unmarried
women.

The French form of _Miss Julia's_ Christian name is, on the other
hand, in keeping with the author's intention, aiming at an
expression of the foreign sympathies and manners which began to
characterize the Swedish nobility in the eighteenth century, and
which continued to assert themselves almost to the end of the
nineteenth. But in English that form would not have the same
significance, and nothing in the play makes its use imperative. The
valet, on the other hand, would most appropriately be named _Jean_
both in England and here, and for that reason I have retained this
form of his name.

Almost every one translating from the Scandinavian languages
insists on creating a difficulty out of the fact that the three
northern nations--like the Germans and the French--still use the
second person singular of the personal pronoun to indicate a closer
degree of familiarity. But to translate the Swedish "du" with the
English "thou" is as erroneous as it is awkward. Tytler laid down
his "Principles of Translation" in 1791--and a majority of
translators are still unaware of their existence. Yet it ought to
seem self-evident to every thinking mind that idiomatic
equivalence, not verbal identity, must form the basis of a good and
faithful translation. When an English mother uses "you" to her
child, she establishes thereby the only rational equivalent for the
"du" used under similar circumstances by her Swedish sister.

Nobody familiar with the English language as it actually springs
from the lips of living men and women can doubt that it offers ways
of expressing varying shades of intimacy no less effective than any
found in the Swedish tongue. Let me give an illustration from the
play immediately under discussion. Returning to the stage after the
ballet scene, _Jean_ says to _Miss Julia_: "I love you--can you
doubt it?" And her reply, literally, is: "You?--Say thou!" I have
merely made him say: "Can you doubt it, Miss Julia?" and her
answer: "Miss?--Call me Julia!" As that is just what would happen
under similar circumstances among English-speaking people, I
contend that not a whit of the author's meaning or spirit has been
lost in this translation.

If ever a play was written for the stage, it is this one. And on
the stage there is nothing to take the place of the notes and
introductory explanations that so frequently encumber the printed
volume. On the stage all explanations must lie within the play
itself, and so they should in the book also, I believe. The
translator is either an artist or a man unfit for his work. As an
artist he must have a courage that cannot even be cowed by his
reverence for the work of a great creative genius. If, mistakenly,
he revere the letter of that work instead of its spirit, then he
will reduce his own task to mere literary carpentry, and from his
pen will spring not a living form, like the one he has been set to
transplant, but only a death mask!


AUTHOR'S PREFACE

Like almost all other art, that of the stage has long seemed to me
a sort of _Biblia Pauperum_, or a Bible in pictures for those who
cannot read what is written or printed. And in the same way the
playwright has seemed to me a lay preacher spreading the thoughts
of his time in a form so popular that the middle classes, from
which theatrical audiences are mainly drawn, can know what is being
talked about without troubling their brains too much. For this
reason the theatre has always served as a grammar-school to young
people, women, and those who have acquired a little knowledge, all
of whom retain the capacity for deceiving themselves and being
deceived--which means again that they are susceptible to illusions
produced by the suggestions of the author. And for the same reason
I have had a feeling that, in our time, when the rudimentary,
incomplete thought processes operating through our fancy seem to be
developing into reflection, research, and analysis, the theatre
might stand on the verge of being abandoned as a decaying form, for
the enjoyment of which we lack the requisite conditions. The
prolonged theatrical crisis now prevailing throughout Europe speaks
in favour of such a supposition, as well as the fact that, in the
civilised countries producing the greatest thinkers of the age,
namely, England and Germany, the drama is as dead as are most of
the other fine arts.

In some other countries it has, however, been thought possible to
create a new drama by filling the old forms with the contents of a
new time. But, for one thing, there has not been time for the new
thoughts to become so popularized that the public might grasp the
questions raised; secondly, minds have been so inflamed by party
conflicts that pure and disinterested enjoyment has been excluded
from places where one's innermost feelings are violated and the
tyranny of an applauding or hissing majority is exercised with the
openness for which the theatre gives a chance; and, finally, there
has been no new form devised for the new contents, and the new wine
has burst the old bottles.

In the following drama I have not tried to do anything new--for
that cannot be done--but I have tried to modernize the form in
accordance with the demands which I thought the new men of a new
time might be likely to make on this art. And with such a purpose
in view, I have chosen, or surrendered myself to, a theme that
might well be said to lie outside the partisan strife of the day:
for the problem of social ascendancy or decline, of higher or
lower, of better or worse, of men or women, is, has been, and will
be of lasting interest. In selecting this theme from real life, as
it was related to me a number of years ago, when the incident
impressed me very deeply, I found it suited to a tragedy, because
it can only make us sad to see a fortunately placed individual
perish, and this must be the case in still higher degree when we
see an entire family die out. But perhaps a time will arrive when
we have become so developed, so enlightened, that we can remain
indifferent before the spectacle of life, which now seems so
brutal, so cynical, so heartless; when we have closed up those
lower, unreliable instruments of thought which we call feelings,
and which have been rendered not only superfluous but harmful by
the final growth of our reflective organs.

The fact that the heroine arouses our pity depends only on our
weakness in not being able to resist the sense of fear that the
same fate could befall ourselves. And yet it is possible that a
very sensitive spectator might fail to find satisfaction in this
kind of pity, while the man believing in the future might demand
some positive suggestion for the abolition of evil, or, in other
words, some kind of programme. But, first of all, there is no
absolute evil. That one family perishes is the fortune of another
family, which thereby gets a chance to rise. And the alternation of
ascent and descent constitutes one of life's main charms, as
fortune is solely determined by comparison. And to the man with a
programme, who wants to remedy the sad circumstance that the hawk
eats the dove, and the flea eats the hawk, I have this question to
put: why should it be remedied? Life is not so mathematically
idiotic that it lets only the big eat the small, but it happens
just as often that the bee kills the lion, or drives it to madness
at least.

That my tragedy makes a sad impression on many is their own fault.
When we grow strong as were the men of the first French revolution,
then we shall receive an unconditionally good and joyful impression
from seeing the national forests rid of rotting and superannuated
trees that have stood too long in the way of others with equal
right to a period of free growth--an impression good in the same
way as that received from the death of one incurably diseased.

Not long ago they reproached my tragedy "The Father" with being too
sad--just as if they wanted merry tragedies. Everybody is clamouring
arrogantly for "the joy of life," and all theatrical managers are
giving orders for farces, as if the joy of life consisted in being
silly and picturing all human beings as so many sufferers from St.
Vitus' dance or idiocy. I find the joy of life in its violent and
cruel struggles, and my pleasure lies in knowing something and
learning something. And for this reason I have selected an unusual
but instructive case--an exception, in a word--but a great
exception, proving the rule, which, of course, will provoke all
lovers of the commonplace. And what also will offend simple brains
is that my action cannot be traced back to a single motive, that
the view-point is not always the same. An event in real life--and
this discovery is quite recent--springs generally from a whole
series of more or less deep-lying motives, but of these the
spectator chooses as a rule the one his reason can master most
easily, or else the one reflecting most favourably on his power of
reasoning. A suicide is committed. Bad business, says the merchant.
Unrequited love, say the ladies. Sickness, says the sick man.
Crushed hopes, says the shipwrecked. But now it may be that the
motive lay in all or none of these directions. It is possible that
the one who is dead may have hid the main motive by pushing forward
another meant to place his memory in a better light.

In explanation of _Miss Julia's_ sad fate I have suggested many
factors: her mother's fundamental instincts; her father's mistaken
upbringing of the girl; her own nature, and the suggestive influence
of her fiancé on a weak and degenerate brain; furthermore, and more
directly: the festive mood of the Midsummer Eve; the absence of her
father; her physical condition; her preoccupation with the animals;
the excitation of the dance; the dusk of the night; the strongly
aphrodisiacal influence of the flowers; and lastly the chance
forcing the two of them together in a secluded room, to which must
be added the aggressiveness of the excited man.

Thus I have neither been one-sidedly physiological nor one-sidedly
psychological in my procedure. Nor have I merely delivered a moral
preachment. This multiplicity of motives I regard as praiseworthy
because it is in keeping with the views of our own time. And if
others have done the same thing before me, I may boast of not being
the sole inventor of my paradoxes--as all discoveries are named.

In regard to the character-drawing I may say that I have tried to
make my figures rather "characterless," and I have done so for
reasons I shall now state.

In the course of the ages the word character has assumed many
meanings. Originally it signified probably the dominant ground-note
in the complex mass of the self, and as such it was confused with
temperament. Afterward it became the middle-class term for an
automaton, so that an individual whose nature had come to a stand
still, or who had adapted himself to a certain part in life--who
had ceased to grow, in a word--was named a character; while one
remaining in a state of development--a skilful navigator on life's
river, who did not sail with close-tied sheets, but knew when to
fall off before the wind and when to luff again--was called lacking
in character. And he was called so in a depreciatory sense, of
course, because he was so hard to catch, to classify, and to keep
track of. This middle-class notion about the immobility of the soul
was transplanted to the stage, where the middle-class element has
always held sway. There a character became synonymous with a
gentleman fixed and finished once for all--one who invariably
appeared drunk, jolly, sad. And for the purpose of characterisation
nothing more was needed than some physical deformity like a
clubfoot, a wooden leg, a red nose; or the person concerned was
made to repeat some phrase like "That's capital!" or "Barkis is
willin'," or something of that kind. This manner of regarding human
beings as homogeneous is preserved even by the great Molière.
_Harpagon_ is nothing but miserly, although _Harpagon_ might as
well have been at once miserly and a financial genius, a fine
father, and a public-spirited citizen. What is worse yet, his
"defect" is of distinct advantage to his son-in-law and daughter,
who are his heirs, and for that reason should not find fault with
him, even if they have to wait a little for their wedding. I do not
believe, therefore, in simple characters on the stage. And the
summary judgments of the author upon men--this one stupid, and that
one brutal, this one jealous, and that one stingy--should be
challenged by the naturalists, who know the fertility of the
soul-complex, and who realise that "vice" has a reverse very much
resembling virtue.

Because they are modern characters, living in a period of transition
more hysterically hurried than its immediate predecessor at least,
I have made my figures vacillating, out of joint, torn between the
old and the new. And I do not think it unlikely that, through
newspaper reading and overheard conversations, modern ideas may
have leaked down to the strata where domestic servants belong.

My souls (or characters) are conglomerates, made up of past and
present stages of civilisation, scraps of humanity, torn-off pieces
of Sunday clothing turned into rags--all patched together as is the
human soul itself. And I have furthermore offered a touch of
evolutionary history by letting the weaker repeat words stolen from
the stronger, and by letting different souls accept "ideas"--or
suggestions, as they are called--from each other.

_Miss Julia_ is a modern character, not because the man-hating
half-woman may not have existed in all ages, but because now, after
her discovery, she has stepped to the front and begun to make a
noise. The half-woman is a type coming more and more into
prominence, selling herself nowadays for power, decorations,
distinctions, diplomas, as formerly for money, and the type
indicates degeneration. It is not a good type, for it does not
last, but unfortunately it has the power of reproducing itself and
its misery through one more generation. And degenerate men seem
instinctively to make their selection from this kind of women, so
that they multiply and produce indeterminate sexes to whom life is
a torture. Fortunately, however, they perish in the end, either
from discord with real life, or from the irresistible revolt of
their suppressed instincts, or from foiled hopes of possessing the
man. The type is tragical, offering us the spectacle of a desperate
struggle against nature. It is also tragical as a Romantic
inheritance dispersed by the prevailing Naturalism, which wants
nothing but happiness: and for happiness strong and sound races are
required.

But _Miss Julia_ is also a remnant of the old military nobility
which is now giving way to the new nobility of nerves and brain.
She is a victim of the discord which a mother's "crime" produces in
a family, and also a victim of the day's delusions, of the
circumstances, of her defective constitution--all of which may be
held equivalent to the old-fashioned fate or universal law. The
naturalist has wiped out the idea of guilt, but he cannot wipe out
the results of an action--punishment, prison, or fear--and for the
simple reason that they remain without regard to his verdict. For
fellow-beings that have been wronged are not so good-natured as
those on the outside, who have not been wronged at all, can be
without cost to themselves.

Even if, for reasons over which he could have no control, the
father should forego his vengeance, the daughter would take
vengeance upon herself, just as she does in the play, and she would
be moved to it by that innate or acquired sense of honour which the
upper classes inherit--whence? From the days of barbarism, from the
original home of the Aryans, from the chivalry of the Middle Ages?
It is beautiful, but it has become disadvantageous to the
preservation of the race. It is this, the nobleman's _harakiri_--or
the law of the inner conscience compelling the Japanese to cut open
his own abdomen at the insult of another--which survives, though
somewhat modified, in the duel, also a privilege of the nobility.
For this reason the valet, _Jean_, continues to live, but _Miss
Julia_ cannot live on without honour. In so far as he lacks this
lifeendangering superstition about honour, the serf takes
precedence of the earl, and in all of us Aryans there is something
of the nobleman, or of Don Quixote, which makes us sympathise with
the man who takes his own life because he has committed a
dishonourable deed and thus lost his honour. And we are noblemen to
the extent of suffering from seeing the earth littered with the
living corpse of one who was once great--yes, even if the one thus
fallen should rise again and make restitution by honourable deeds.

_Jean_, the valet, is of the kind that builds new stock--one in
whom the differentiation is clearly noticeable. He was a cotter's
child, and he has trained himself up to the point where the future
gentleman has become visible. He has found it easy to learn, having
finely developed senses (smell, taste, vision) and an instinct for
beauty besides. He has already risen in the world, and is strong
enough not to be sensitive about using other people's services. He
has already become a stranger to his equals, despising them as so
many outlived stages, but also fearing and fleeing them because
they know his secrets, pry into his plans, watch his rise with
envy, and look forward to his fall with pleasure. From this
relationship springs his dual, indeterminate character, oscillating
between love of distinction and hatred of those who have already
achieved it. He says himself that he is an aristocrat, and has
learned the secrets of good company. He is polished on the outside
and coarse within. He knows already how to wear the frock-coat with
ease, but the cleanliness of his body cannot be guaranteed.

He feels respect for the young lady, but he is afraid of _Christine_,
who has his dangerous secrets in her keeping. His emotional
callousness is sufficient to prevent the night's happenings from
exercising a disturbing influence on his plans for the future.
Having at once the slave's brutality and the master's lack of
squeamishness, he can see blood without fainting, and he can also
bend his back under a mishap until able to throw it off. For this
reason he will emerge unharmed from the battle, and will probably
end his days as the owner of a hotel. And if he does not become a
Roumanian count, his son will probably go to a university, and may
even become a county attorney.

Otherwise, he furnishes us with rather significant information as
to the way in which the lower classes look at life from beneath-
that is, when he speaks the truth, which is not often, as he
prefers what seems favourable to himself to what is true. When
_Miss Julia_ suggests that the lower classes must feel the pressure
from above very heavily, _Jean_ agrees with her, of course, because
he wants to gain her sympathy. But he corrects himself at once, the
moment he realises the advantage of standing apart from the herd.

And _Jean_ stands above _Miss Julia_ not only because his fate is in
ascendancy, but because he is a man. Sexually he is the aristocrat
because of his male strength, his more finely developed senses, and
his capacity for taking the initiative. His inferiority depends
mainly on the temporary social environment in which he has to live,
and which he probably can shed together with the valet's livery.

The mind of the slave speaks through his reverence for the count
(as shown in the incident with the boots) and through his religious
superstition. But he reveres the count principally as a possessor
of that higher position toward which he himself is striving. And
this reverence remains even when he has won the daughter of the
house, and seen that the beautiful shell covered nothing but
emptiness.

I don't believe that any love relation in a "higher" sense can
spring up between two souls of such different quality. And for this
reason I let _Miss Julia_ imagine her love to be protective or
commiserative in its origin. And I let _Jean_ suppose that, under
different social conditions, he might feel something like real love
for her. I believe love to be like the hyacinth, which has to
strike roots in darkness _before_ it can bring forth a vigorous
flower. In this case it shoots up quickly, bringing forth blossom
and seed at once, and for that reason the plant withers so soon.

_Christine_, finally, is a female slave, full of servility and
sluggishness acquired in front of the kitchen fire, and stuffed
full of morality and religion that are meant to serve her at once
as cloak and scapegoat. Her church-going has for its purpose to
bring her quick and easy riddance of all responsibility for her
domestic thieveries and to equip her with a new stock of
guiltlessness. Otherwise she is a subordinate figure, and therefore
purposely sketched in the same manner as the minister and the
doctor in "The Father," whom I designed as ordinary human beings,
like the common run of country ministers and country doctors. And
if these accessory characters have seemed mere abstractions to some
people, it depends on the fact that ordinary men are to a certain
extent impersonal in the exercise of their callings. This means
that they are without individuality, showing only one side of
themselves while at work. And as long as the spectator does not
feel the need of seeing them from other sides, my abstract
presentation of them remains on the whole correct.

In regard to the dialogue, I want to point out that I have departed
somewhat from prevailing traditions by not turning my figures into
catechists who make stupid questions in order to call forth witty
answers. I have avoided the symmetrical and mathematical
construction of the French dialogue, and have instead permitted the
minds to work irregularly as they do in reality, where, during
conversation, the cogs of one mind seem more or less haphazardly to
engage those of another one, and where no topic is fully exhausted.
Naturally enough, therefore, the dialogue strays a good deal as, in
the opening scenes, it acquires a material that later on is worked
over, picked up again, repeated, expounded, and built up like the
theme in a musical composition.

The plot is pregnant enough, and as, at bottom, it is concerned
only with two persons, I have concentrated my attention on these,
introducing only one subordinate figure, the cook, and keeping the
unfortunate spirit of the father hovering above and beyond the
action. I have done this because I believe I have noticed that the
psychological processes are what interest the people of our own day
more than anything else. Our souls, so eager for knowledge, cannot
rest satisfied with seeing what happens, but must also learn how it
comes to happen! What we want to see are just the wires, the
machinery. We want to investigate the box with the false bottom,
touch the magic ring in order to find the suture, and look into the
cards to discover how they are marked.

In this I have taken for models the monographic novels of the
brothers de Goncourt, which have appealed more to me than any other
modern literature.

Turning to the technical side of the composition, I have tried to
abolish the division into acts. And I have done so because I have
come to fear that our decreasing capacity for illusion might be
unfavourably affected by intermissions during which the spectator
would have time to reflect and to get away from the suggestive
influence of the author-hypnotist. My play will probably last an
hour and a half, and as it is possible to listen that length of
time, or longer, to a lecture, a sermon, or a debate, I have
imagined that a theatrical performance could not become fatiguing
in the same time. As early as 1872, in one of my first dramatic
experiments, "The Outlaw," I tried the same concentrated form, but
with scant success. The play was written in five acts and wholly
completed when I became aware of the restless, scattered effect it
produced. Then I burned it, and out of the ashes rose a single,
well-built act, covering fifty printed pages, and taking hour for
its performance. Thus the form of the present play is not new, but
it seems to be my own, and changing aesthetical conventions may
possibly make it timely.

My hope is still for a public educated to the point where it can
sit through a whole-evening performance in a single act. But that
point cannot be reached without a great deal of experimentation. In
the meantime I have resorted to three art forms that are to provide
resting-places for the public and the actors, without letting the
public escape from the illusion induced. All these forms are
subsidiary to the drama. They are the monologue, the pantomime, and
the dance, all of them belonging originally to the tragedy of
classical antiquity. For the monologue has sprung from the monody,
and the chorus has developed into the ballet.

Our realists have excommunicated the monologue as improbable, but
if I can lay a proper basis for it, I can also make it seem
probable, and then I can use it to good advantage. It is probable,
for instance, that a speaker may walk back and forth in his room
practising his speech aloud; it is probable that an actor may read
through his part aloud, that a servant-girl may talk to her cat,
that a mother may prattle to her child, that an old spinster may
chatter to her parrot, that a person may talk in his sleep. And in
order that the actor for once may have a chance to work independently,
and to be free for a moment from the author's pointer, it is better
that the monologues be not written out, but just indicated. As it
matters comparatively little what is said to the parrot or the cat,
or in one's sleep--because it cannot influence the action--it is
possible that a gifted actor, carried away by the situation and the
mood of the occasion, may improvise such matters better than they
could be written by the author, who cannot figure out in advance
how much may be said, and how long the talk may last, without
waking the public out of their illusions.

It is well known that, on certain stages, the Italian theatre has
returned to improvisation and thereby produced creative actors
who, however, must follow the author's suggestions--and this may be
counted a step forward, or even the beginning of a new art form
that might well be called _productive_.

Where, on the other hand, the monologue would seem unreal, I have
used the pantomime, and there I have left still greater scope for
the actor's imagination--and for his desire to gain independent
honours. But in order that the public may not be tried beyond
endurance, I have permitted the music--which is amply warranted by
the Midsummer Eve's dance--to exercise its illusory power while the
dumb show lasts. And I ask the musical director to make careful
selection of the music used for this purpose, so that incompatible
moods are not induced by reminiscences from the last musical comedy
or topical song, or by folk-tunes of too markedly ethnographical
distinction.

The mere introduction of a scene with a lot of "people" could not
have taken the place of the dance, for such scenes are poorly acted
and tempt a number of grinning idiots into displaying their own
smartness, whereby the illusion is disturbed. As the common people
do not improvise their gibes, but use ready-made phrases in which
stick some double meaning, I have not composed their lampooning
song, but have appropriated a little known folk-dance which I
personally noted down in a district near Stockholm. The words don't
quite hit the point, but hint vaguely at it, and this is
intentional, for the cunning (i. e., weakness) of the slave keeps
him from any direct attack. There must, then, be no chattering
clowns in a serious action, and no coarse flouting at a situation
that puts the lid on the coffin of a whole family.

As far as the scenery is concerned, I have borrowed from
impressionistic painting its asymmetry, its quality of abruptness,
and have thereby in my opinion strengthened the illusion. Because
the whole room and all its contents are not shown, there is a
chance to guess at things--that is, our imagination is stirred into
complementing our vision. I have made a further gain in getting rid
of those tiresome exits by means of doors, especially as stage
doors are made of canvas and swing back and forth at the lightest
touch. They are not even capable of expressing the anger of an
irate _pater familias_ who, on leaving his home after a poor
dinner, slams the door behind him "so that it shakes the whole
house." (On the stage the house sways.) I have also contented
myself with a single setting, and for the double purpose of making
the figures become parts of their surroundings, and of breaking
with the tendency toward luxurious scenery. But having only a
single setting, one may demand to have it real. Yet nothing is more
difficult than to get a room that looks something like a room,
although the painter can easily enough produce waterfalls and
flaming volcanoes. Let it go at canvas for the walls, but we might
be done with the painting of shelves and kitchen utensils on the
canvas. We have so much else on the stage that is conventional, and
in which we are asked to believe, that we might at least be spared
the too great effort of believing in painted pans and kettles.

I have placed the rear wall and the table diagonally across the
stage in order to make the actors show full face and half profile
to the audience when they sit opposite each other at the table. In
the opera "Aïda" I noticed an oblique background, which led the eye
out into unseen prospects. And it did not appear to be the result
of any reaction against the fatiguing right angle.

Another novelty well needed would be the abolition of the foot-lights.
The light from below is said to have for its purpose to make the
faces of the actors look fatter. But I cannot help asking: why must
all actors be fat in the face? Does not this light from below tend
to wipe out the subtler lineaments in the lower part of the face,
and especially around the jaws? Does it not give a false appearance
to the nose and cast shadows upward over the eyes? If this be not
so, another thing is certain: namely, that the eyes of the actors
suffer from the light, so that the effective play of their glances
is precluded. Coming from below, the light strikes the retina in
places generally protected (except in sailors, who have to see the
sun reflected in the water), and for this reason one observes
hardly anything but a vulgar rolling of the eyes, either sideways
or upwards, toward the galleries, so that nothing but the white of
the eye shows. Perhaps the same cause may account for the tedious
blinking of which especially the actresses are guilty. And when
anybody on the stage wants to use his eyes to speak with, no other
way is left him but the poor one of staring straight at the public,
with whom he or she then gets into direct communication outside of
the frame provided by the setting. This vicious habit has, rightly
or wrongly, been named "to meet friends." Would it not be possible
by means of strong side-lights (obtained by the employment of
reflectors, for instance) to add to the resources already possessed
by the actor? Could not his mimicry be still further strengthened
by use of the greatest asset possessed by the face: the play of the
eyes?

Of course, I have no illusions about getting the actors to play
_for_ the public and not _at_ it, although such a change would be
highly desirable. I dare not even dream of beholding the actor's
back throughout an important scene, but I wish with all my heart
that crucial scenes might not be played in the centre of the
proscenium, like duets meant to bring forth applause. Instead, I
should like to have them laid in the place indicated by the
situation. Thus I ask for no revolutions, but only for a few minor
modifications. To make a real room of the stage, with the fourth
wall missing, and a part of the furniture placed back toward the
audience, would probably produce a disturbing effect at present.

In wishing to speak of the facial make-up, I have no hope that the
ladies will listen to me, as they would rather look beautiful than
lifelike. But the actor might consider whether it be to his
advantage to paint his face so that it shows some abstract type
which covers it like a mask. Suppose that a man puts a markedly
choleric line between the eyes, and imagine further that some
remark demands a smile of this face fixed in a state of continuous
wrath. What a horrible grimace will be the result? And how can the
wrathful old man produce a frown on his false forehead, which is
smooth as a billiard ball?

In modern psychological dramas, where the subtlest movements of the
soul are to be reflected on the face rather than by gestures and
noise, it would probably be well to experiment with strong side-light
on a small stage, and with unpainted faces, or at least with a
minimum of make-up.

If, in additon, we might escape the visible orchestra, with its
disturbing lamps and its faces turned toward the public; if we
could have the seats on the main floor (the orchestra or the pit)
raised so that the eyes of the spectators would be above the knees
of the actors; if we could get rid of the boxes with their
tittering parties of diners; if we could also have the auditorium
completely darkened during the performance; and if, first and last,
we could have a small stage and a small house: then a new dramatic
art might rise, and the theatre might at least become an
institution for the entertainment of people with culture. While
waiting for this kind of theatre, I suppose we shall have to write
for the "ice-box," and thus prepare the repertory that is to come.

I have made an attempt. If it prove a failure, there is plenty of
time to try over again.


MISS JULIA
A NATURALISTIC TRAGEDY
1888


PERSONS

MISS JULIA, aged twenty-five
JEAN, a valet, aged thirty
CHRISTINE, a cook, aged thirty-five

The action takes place on Midsummer Eve, in the kitchen of the
count's country house.


MISS JULIA

SCENE

(A large kitchen: the ceiling and the side walls are hidden by
draperies and hangings. The rear wall runs diagonally across the
stage, from the left side and away from the spectators. On this
wall, to the left, there are two shelves full of utensils made of
copper, iron, and tin. The shelves are trimmed with scalloped
paper.)

(A little to the right may be seen three fourths of the big arched
doorway leading to the outside. It has double glass doors, through
which are seen a fountain with a cupid, lilac shrubs in bloom, and
the tops of some Lombardy poplars.)

(On the left side of the stage is seen the corner of a big cook
stove built of glazed bricks; also a part of the smoke-hood above
it.)

(From the right protrudes one end of the servants' dining-table
of white pine, with a few chairs about it.)

(The stove is dressed with bundled branches of birch. Twigs of
juniper are scattered on the floor.)

(On the table end stands a big Japanese spice pot full of lilac
blossoms.)

(An icebox, a kitchen-table, and a wash-stand.)

(Above the door hangs a big old-fashioned bell on a steel spring,
and the mouthpiece of a speaking-tube appears at the left of the
door.)

(CHRISTINE is standing by the stove, frying something in a pan. She
has on a dress of light-coloured cotton, which she has covered up
with a big kitchen apron.)

(JEAN enters, dressed in livery and carrying a pair of big, spurred
riding boots, which he places on the floor in such manner that they
remain visible to the spectators.)

JEAN. To-night Miss Julia is crazy again; absolutely crazy.

CHRISTINE. So you're back again?

JEAN. I took the count to the station, and when I came back by the
barn, I went in and had a dance, and there I saw the young lady
leading the dance with the gamekeeper. But when she caught sight of
me, she rushed right up to me and asked me to dance the ladies'
waltz with her. And ever since she's been waltzing like--well, I
never saw the like of it. She's crazy!


CHRISTINE. And has always been, but never the way it's been this
last fortnight, since her engagement was broken.

JEAN. Well, what kind of a story was that anyhow? He's a fine
fellow, isn't he, although he isn't rich? Ugh, but they're so full
of notions. [Sits down at the end of the table] It's peculiar
anyhow, that a young lady--hm!--would rather stay at home with the
servants--don't you think?--than go with her father to their
relatives!

CHRISTINE. Oh, I guess she feels sort of embarrassed by that rumpus
with her fellow.

JEAN. Quite likely. But there was some backbone to that man just
the same. Do you know how it happened, Christine? I saw it,
although I didn't care to let on.

CHRISTINE. No, did you?

JEAN. Sure, I did. They were in the stable-yard one evening, and
the young lady was training him, as she called it. Do you know what
that meant? She made him leap over her horse-whip the way you teach
a dog to jump. Twice he jumped and got a cut each time. The third
time he took the whip out of her hand and broke it into a thousand
bits. And then he got out.

CHRISTINE. So that's the way it happened! You don't say!

JEAN. Yes, that's how that thing happened. Well, Christine, what
have you got that's tasty?

CHRISTINE. [Serves from the pan and puts the plate before Jean] Oh,
just some kidney which I cut out of the veal roast.

JEAN. [Smelling the food] Fine! That's my great _délice_. [Feeling
the plate] But you might have warmed the plate.

CHRISTINE. Well, if you ain't harder to please than the count
himself! [Pulls his hair playfully.]

JEAN. [Irritated] Don't pull my hair! You know how sensitive I am.

CHRISTINE. Well, well, it was nothing but a love pull, you know.

[JEAN eats.]

[CHRISTINE opens a bottle of beer.]

JEAN. Beer-on Midsummer Eve? No, thank you! Then I have something
better myself. [Opens a table-drawer and takes out a bottle of
claret with yellow cap] Yellow seal, mind you! Give me a glass-and
you use those with stems when you drink it _pure_.

CHRISTINE. [Returns to the stove and puts a small pan on the fire]
Heaven preserve her that gets you for a husband, Mr. Finicky!

JEAN. Oh, rot! You'd be glad enough to get a smart fellow like me.
And I guess it hasn't hurt you that they call me your beau.
[Tasting the wine] Good! Pretty good! Just a tiny bit too cold. [He
warms the glass with his hand.] We got this at Dijon. It cost us
four francs per litre, not counting the bottle. And there was the
duty besides. What is it you're cooking--with that infernal smell?

CHRISTINE. Oh, it's some deviltry the young lady is going to give
Diana.

JEAN. You should choose your words with more care, Christine. But
why should you be cooking for a bitch on a holiday eve like this?
Is she sick?

CHRISTINE. Ye-es, she is sick. She's been running around with the
gate-keeper's pug--and now's there's trouble--and the young lady
just won't hear of it.

JEAN. The young lady is too stuck up in some ways and not proud
enough in others--just as was the countess while she lived. She was
most at home in the kitchen and among the cows, but she would never
drive with only one horse. She wore her cuffs till they were dirty,
but she had to have cuff buttons with a coronet on them. And
speaking of the young lady, she doesn't take proper care of herself
and her person. I might even say that she's lacking in refinement.
Just now, when she was dancing in the barn, she pulled the
gamekeeper away from Anna and asked him herself to come and dance
with her. We wouldn't act in that way. But that's just how it is:
when upper-class people want to demean themselves, then they grow-
mean! But she's splendid! Magnificent! Oh, such shoulders! And--and
so on!

CHRISTINE. Oh, well, don't brag too much! I've heard Clara talking,
who tends to her dressing.

JEAN. Pooh, Clara! You're always jealous of each other. I, who have
been out riding with her--And then the way she dances!

CHRISTINE. Say, Jean, won't you dance with me when I'm done?

JEAN. Of course I will.

CHRISTINE. Do you promise?

JEAN. Promise? When I say so, I'll do it. Well, here's thanks for
the good food. It tasted fine! [Puts the cork back into the bottle.]

JULIA. [Appears in the doorway, speaking to somebody on the
outside] I'll be back in a minute. You go right on in the meantime.

[JEAN slips the bottle into the table-drawer and rises
respectfully.]

JULIA.[Enters and goes over to CHRISTINE by the wash-stand] Well,
is it done yet?

[CHRISTINE signs to her that JEAN is present.]

JEAN. [Gallantly] The ladies are having secrets, I believe.

JULIA. [Strikes him in the face with her handkerchief] That's for
you, Mr. Pry!

JEAN. Oh, what a delicious odor that violet has!

JULIA. [With coquetry] Impudent! So you know something about
perfumes also? And know pretty well how to dance--Now don't peep!
Go away!

JEAN. [With polite impudence] Is it some kind of witches' broth the
ladies are cooking on Midsummer Eve--something to tell fortunes by
and bring out the lucky star in which one's future love is seen?

JULIA. [Sharply] If you can see that, you'll have good eyes,
indeed! [To CHRISTINE] Put it in a pint bottle and cork it well.
Come and dance a _schottische_ with me now, Jean.

JEAN. [Hesitatingly] I don't want to be impolite, but I had
promised to dance with Christine this time-

JULIA. Well, she can get somebody else--can't you, Christine? Won't
you let me borrow Jean from you?

CHRISTINE. That isn't for me to say. When Miss Julia is so
gracious, it isn't for him to say no. You just go along, and be
thankful for the honour, too!

JEAN. Frankly speaking, but not wishing to offend in any way, I
cannot help wondering if it's wise for Miss Julia to dance twice in
succession with the same partner, especially as the people here are
not slow in throwing out hints--

JULIA. [Flaring up] What is that? What kind of hints? What do you
mean?

JEAN. [Submissively] As you don't want to understand, I have to
speak more plainly. It don't look well to prefer one servant to all
the rest who are expecting to be honoured in the same unusual way--

JULIA. Prefer! What ideas! I'm surprised! I, the mistress of the
house, deign to honour this dance with my presence, and when it so
happens that I actually want to dance, I want to dance with one who
knows how to lead, so that I am not made ridiculous.

JEAN. As you command, Miss Julia! I am at your service!

JULIA. [Softened] Don't take it as a command. To-night we should
enjoy ourselves as a lot of happy people, and all rank should be
forgotten. Now give me your arm. Don't be afraid, Christine! I'll
return your beau to you!

[JEAN offers his arm to MISS JULIA and leads her out.]

***

PANTOMIME

Must be acted as if the actress were really alone in the place.
When necessary she turns her back to the public. She should not
look in the direction of the spectators, and she should not hurry
as if fearful that they might become impatient.

CHRISTINE is alone. A _schottische_ tune played on a violin is
heard faintly in the distance.

While humming the tune, CHRISTINE clears o$ the table after JEAN,
washes the plate at the kitchen table, wipes it, and puts it away
in a cupboard.

Then she takes of her apron, pulls out a small mirror from one of
the table-drawers and leans it against the flower jar on the table;
lights a tallow candle and heats a hairpin, which she uses to curl
her front hair.

Then she goes to the door and stands there listening. Returns to
the table. Discovers the handkerchief which MISS JULIA has left
behind, picks it up, and smells it, spreads it out absent-mindedly
and begins to stretch it, smooth it, fold it up, and so forth.

***

JEAN. [Enters alone] Crazy, that's what she is! The way she dances!
And the people stand behind the doors and grill at her. What do you
think of it, Christine?

CHRISTINE. Oh, she has her time now, and then she is always a
little queer like that. But are you going to dance with me now?

JEAN. You are not mad at me because I disappointed you?

CHRISTINE. No!--Not for a little thing like that, you know! And
also, I know my place--

JEAN. [Putting his arm around her waist] You are a, sensible girl,
Christine, and I think you'll make a good wife--

JULIA. [Enters and is unpleasantly surprised; speaks with forced
gayety] Yes, you are a fine partner--running away from your lady!

JEAN. On the contrary, Miss Julia. I have, as you see, looked up
the one I deserted.

JULIA. [Changing tone] Do you know, there is nobody that dances
like you!--But why do you wear your livery on an evening like this?
Take it off at once!

JEAN. Then I must ask you to step outside for a moment, as my black
coat is hanging right here. [Points toward the right and goes in
that direction.]

JULIA. Are you bashful on my account? Just to change a coat? Why
don't you go into your own room and come back again? Or, you can
stay right here, and I'll turn my back on you.

JEAN. With your permission, Miss Julia. [Goes further over to the
right; one of his arms can be seen as he changes his coat.]

JULIA [To CHRISTINE] Are you and Jean engaged, that he's so
familiar with you?

CHRISTINE. Engaged? Well, in a way. We call it that.

JULIA. Call it?

CHRISTINE. Well, Miss Julia, you have had a fellow of your own, and--

JULIA. We were really engaged--

CHRISTINE. But it didn't come to anything just the same--

[JEAN enters, dressed in black frock coat and black derby.]

JULIA. _Très gentil, Monsieur Jean! Très gentil!_

JEAN. _Vous voulez plaisanter, Madame!_

JULIA. _Et vous voulez parler français!_ Where did you learn it?

JEAN. In Switzerland, while I worked as _sommelier_ in one of the
big hotels at Lucerne.

JULIA. But you look like a real gentleman in your frock coat!
Charming! [Sits down at the table.]

JEAN. Oh, you flatter me.

JULIA. [Offended] Flatter--you!

JEAN. My natural modesty does not allow me to believe that you
could be paying genuine compliments to one like me, and so I dare
to assume that you are exaggerating, or, as we call it, flattering.

JULIA. Where did you learn to use your words like that? You must
have been to the theatre a great deal?

JEAN. That, too. I have been to a lot of places.

JULIA. But you were born in this neighbourhood?

JEAN. My father was a cotter on the county attorney's property
right by here, and I can recall seeing you as a child, although
you, of course, didn't notice me.

JULIA. No, really!

JEAN. Yes, and I remember one time in particular--but of that I
can't speak.

JULIA. Oh, yes, do! Why--just for once.

JEAN. No, really, I cannot do it now. Another time, perhaps.

JULIA. Another time is no time. Is it as bad as that?

JEAN. It isn't bad, but it comes a little hard. Look at that one!
[Points to CHRISTINE, who has fallen asleep on a chair by the stove.]

JULIA. She'll make a pleasant wife. And perhaps she snores, too.

JEAN. No, she doesn't, but she talks in her sleep.

JULIA. [Cynically] How do you know?

JEAN. [Insolently] I have heard it.

[Pause during which they study each other.]

JULIA. Why don't you sit down?

JEAN. It wouldn't be proper in your presence.

JULIA. But if I order you to do it?

JEAN. Then I obey.

JULIA. Sit down, then!--But wait a moment! Can you give me
something to drink first?

JEAN. I don't know what we have got in the icebox. I fear it is
nothing but beer.

JULIA. And you call that nothing? My taste is so simple that I
prefer it to wine.

JEAN. [Takes a bottle of beer from the icebox and opens it; gets a
glass and a plate from the cupboard, and serves the beer] Allow me!

JULIA. Thank you. Don't you want some yourself?

JEAN. I don't care very much for beer, but if it is a command, of
course--

JULIA. Command?--I should think a polite gentleman might keep his
lady company.

JEAN. Yes, that's the way it should be. [Opens another bottle and
takes out a glass.]

JULIA. Drink my health now!

[JEAN hesitates.]

JULIA. Are you bashful--a big, grown-up man?

JEAN. [Kneels with mock solemnity and raises his glass] To the
health of my liege lady!

JULIA. Bravo!--And now you must also kiss my shoe in order to get
it just right.

[JEAN hesitates a moment; then he takes hold of her foot and
touches it lightly with his lips.]

JULIA. Excellent! You should have been on the stage.

JEAN. [Rising to his feet] This won't do any longer, Miss Julia.
Somebody might see us.

JULIA. What would that matter?

JEAN. Oh, it would set the people talking--that's all! And if you
only knew how their tongues were wagging up there a while ago-

JULIA. What did they have to say? Tell me--Sit down now!

JEAN. [Sits down] I don't want to hurt you, but they were using
expressions--which cast reflections of a kind that--oh, you know it
yourself! You are not a child, and when a lady is seen alone with a
man, drinking--no matter if he's only a servant--and at night-then--

JULIA. Then what? And besides, we are not alone. Isn't Christine
with us?

JEAN. Yes--asleep!

JULIA. Then I'll wake her. [Rising] Christine, are you asleep?

CHRISTINE. [In her sleep] Blub-blub-blub-blub!

JULIA. Christine!--Did you ever see such a sleeper.

CHRISTINE. [In her sleep] The count's boots are polished--put on
the coffee--yes, yes, yes--my-my--pooh!

JULIA. [Pinches her nose] Can't you wake up?

JEAN. [Sternly] You shouldn't bother those that sleep.

JULIA. [Sharply] What's that?

JEAN. One who has stood by the stove all day has a right to be
tired at night. And sleep should be respected.

JULIA. [Changing tone] It is fine to think like that, and it does
you honour--I thank you for it. [Gives JEAN her hand] Come now and
pick some lilacs for me.

[During the following scene CHRISTINE wakes up. She moves as if
still asleep and goes out to the right in order to go to bed.]

JEAN. With you, Miss Julia?

JULIA. With me!

JEAN. But it won't do! Absolutely not!

JULIA. I can't understand what you are thinking of. You couldn't
possibly imagine--

JEAN. No, not I, but the people.

JULIA. What? That I am fond of the valet?

JEAN. I am not at all conceited, but such things have happened--and
to the people nothing is sacred.

JULIA. You are an aristocrat, I think.

JEAN. Yes, I am.

JULIA. And I am stepping down--

JEAN. Take my advice, Miss Julia, don't step down. Nobody will
believe you did it on purpose. The people will always say that you
fell down.

JULIA. I think better of the people than you do. Come and see if I
am not right. Come along! [She ogles him.]

JEAN. You're mighty queer, do you know!

JULIA. Perhaps. But so are you. And for that matter, everything is
queer. Life, men, everything--just a mush that floats on top of the
water until it sinks, sinks down! I have a dream that comes back to
me ever so often. And just now I am reminded of it. I have climbed
to the top of a column and sit there without being able to tell how
to get down again. I get dizzy when I look down, and I must get
down, but I haven't the courage to jump off. I cannot hold on, and
I am longing to fall, and yet I don't fall. But there will be no
rest for me until I get down, no rest until I get down, down on the
ground. And if I did reach the ground, I should want to get still
further down, into the ground itself--Have you ever felt like that?

JEAN. No, my dream is that I am lying under a tall tree in a dark
wood. I want to get up, up to the top, so that I can look out over
the smiling landscape, where the sun is shining, and so that I can
rob the nest in which lie the golden eggs. And I climb and climb,
but the trunk is so thick and smooth, and it is so far to the first
branch. But I know that if I could only reach that first branch,
then I should go right on to the top as on a ladder. I have not
reached it yet, but I am going to, if it only be in my dreams.

JULIA. Here I am chattering to you about dreams! Come along! Only
into the park! [She offers her arm to him, and they go toward the
door.]

JEAN. We must sleep on nine midsummer flowers to-night, Miss Julia-
then our dreams will come true.

[They turn around in the doorway, and JEAN puts one hand up to his
eyes.]

JULIA. Let me see what you have got in your eye.

JEAN. Oh, nothing--just some dirt--it will soon be gone.

JULIA. It was my sleeve that rubbed against it. Sit down and let me
help you. [Takes him by the arm and makes him sit down; takes hold
of his head and bends it backwards; tries to get out the dirt with
a corner of her handkerchief] Sit still now, absolutely still!
[Slaps him on the hand] Well, can't you do as I say? I think you
are shaking-a big, strong fellow like you! [Feels his biceps] And
with such arms!

JEAN. [Ominously] Miss Julia!

JULIA. Yes, Monsieur Jean.

JEAN. _Attention! Je ne suis qu'un homme._

JULIA. Can't you sit still!--There now! Now it's gone. Kiss my hand
now, and thank me.

JEAN. [Rising] Miss Julia, listen to me. Christine has gone to bed
now--Won't you listen to me?

JULIA. Kiss my hand first.

JEAN. Listen to me!

JULIA. Kiss my hand first!

JEAN. All right, but blame nobody but yourself!

JULIA. For what?

JEAN. For what? Are you still a mere child at twenty-five? Don't
you know that it is dangerous to play with fire?

JULIA. Not for me. I am insured.

JEAN. [Boldly] No, you are not. And even if you were, there are
inflammable surroundings to be counted with.

JULIA. That's you, I suppose?

JEAN. Yes. Not because I am I, but because I am a young man--

JULIA. Of handsome appearance--what an incredible conceit! A Don
Juan, perhaps. Or a Joseph? On my soul, I think you are a Joseph!

JEAN. Do you?

JULIA. I fear it almost.

[JEAN goes boldly up to her and takes her around the waist in order
to kiss her.]

JULIA. [Gives him a cuff on the ear] Shame!

JEAN. Was that in play or in earnest?

JULIA. In earnest.

JEAN. Then you were in earnest a moment ago also. Your playing is
too serious, and that's the dangerous thing about it. Now I am
tired of playing, and I ask to be excused in order to resume my
work. The count wants his boots to be ready for him, and it is
after midnight already.

JULIA. Put away the boots.

JEAN. No, it's my work, which I am bound to do. But I have not
undertaken to be your playmate. It's something I can never become-
I hold myself too good for it.

JULIA. You're proud!

JEAN. In some ways, and not in others.

JULIA. Have you ever been in love?

JEAN. We don't use that word. But I have been fond of a lot of
girls, and once I was taken sick because I couldn't have the one I
wanted: sick, you know, like those princes in the Arabian Nights
who cannot eat or drink for sheer love.

JULIA. Who was it?

[JEAN remains silent.]

JULIA. Who was it?

JEAN. You cannot make me tell you.

JULIA. If I ask you as an equal, ask you as--a friend: who was it?

JEAN. It was you.

JULIA. [Sits down] How funny!

JEAN. Yes, as you say--it was ludicrous. That was the story, you
see, which I didn't want to tell you a while ago. But now I am
going to tell it. Do you know how the world looks from below--no,
you don't. No more than do hawks and falcons, of whom we never see
the back because they are always floating about high up in the sky.
I lived in the cotter's hovel, together with seven other children,
and a pig--out there on the grey plain, where there isn't a single
tree. But from our windows I could see the wall around the count's
park, and apple-trees above it. That was the Garden of Eden, and
many fierce angels were guarding it with flaming swords.
Nevertheless I and some other boys found our way to the Tree of
Life--now you despise me?

JULIA. Oh, stealing apples is something all boys do.

JEAN. You may say so now, but you despise me nevertheless. However-
once I got into the Garden of Eden with my mother to weed the onion
beds. Near by stood a Turkish pavillion, shaded by trees and
covered with honeysuckle. I didn't know what it was used for, but I
had never seen a more beautiful building. People went in and came
out again, and one day the door was left wide open. I stole up and
saw the walls covered with pictures of kings and emperors, and the
windows were hung with red, fringed curtains--now you know what I
mean. I--[breaks off a lilac sprig and holds it under MISS JULIA's
nose]--I had never been inside the manor, and I had never seen
anything but the church--and this was much finer. No matter where
my thoughts ran, they returned always--to that place. And gradually
a longing arose within me to taste the full pleasure of--_enfin_! I
sneaked in, looked and admired. Then I heard somebody coming. There
was only one way out for fine people, but for me there was another,
and I could do nothing else but choose it.

[JULIA, who has taken the lilac sprig, lets it drop on the table.]

JEAN. Then I started to run, plunged through a hedge of raspberry
bushes, chased right across a strawberry plantation, and came out
on the terrace where the roses grow. There I caught sight of a pink
dress and pair of white stockings--that was you! I crawled under a
pile of weeds--right into it, you know--into stinging thistles and
wet, ill-smelling dirt. And I saw you walking among the roses, and
I thought: if it be possible for a robber to get into heaven and
dwell with the angels, then it is strange that a cotter's child,
here on God's own earth, cannot get into the park and play with the
count's daughter.

JULIA. [Sentimentally] Do you think all poor children have the same
thoughts as you had in this case?

JEAN. [Hesitatingly at first; then with conviction] If _all_ poor-
yes-of course. Of course!

JULIA. It must be a dreadful misfortune to be poor.

JEAN. [In a tone of deep distress and with rather exaggerated
emphasis] Oh, Miss Julia! Oh!--A dog may lie on her ladyship's
sofa; a horse may have his nose patted by the young lady's hand,
but a servant--[changing his tone]--oh well, here and there you
meet one made of different stuff, and he makes a way for himself in
the world, but how often does it happen?--However, do you know what
I did? I jumped into the mill brook with my clothes on, and was
pulled out, and got a licking. But the next Sunday, when my father
and the rest of the people were going over to my grandmother's, I
fixed it so that I could stay at home. And then I washed myself
with soap and hot water, and put on my best clothes, and went to
church, where I could see you. I did see you, and went home
determined to die. But I wanted to die beautifully and pleasantly,
without any pain. And then I recalled that it was dangerous to
sleep under an elder bush. We had a big one that was in full bloom.
I robbed it of all its flowers, and then I put them in the big box
where the oats were kept and lay down in them. Did you ever notice
the smoothness of oats? Soft to the touch as the skin of the human
body! However, I pulled down the lid and closed my eyes--fell
asleep and was waked up a very sick boy. But I didn't die, as you
can see. What I wanted--that's more than I can tell. Of course,
there was not the least hope of winning you-but you symbolised the
hopelessness of trying to get out of the class into which I was
born.

JULIA. You narrate splendidly, do you know! Did you ever go to
school?

JEAN. A little. But I have read a lot of novels and gone to the
theatre a good deal. And besides, I have listened to the talk of
better-class people, and from that I have learned most of all.

JULIA. Do you stand around and listen to what we are saying?

JEAN. Of course! And I have heard a lot, too, when I was on the box
of the carriage, or rowing the boat. Once I heard you, Miss Julia,
and one of your girl friends--

JULIA. Oh!--What was it you heard then?

JEAN. Well, it wouldn't be easy to repeat. But I was rather
surprised, and I couldn't understand where you had learned all
those words. Perhaps, at bottom, there isn't quite so much
difference as they think between one kind of people and another.

JULIA. You ought to be ashamed of yourself! We don't live as you do
when we are engaged.

JEAN. [Looking hard at her] Is it so certain?--Well, Miss Julia, it
won't pay to make yourself out so very innocent to me-

JULIA. The man on whom I bestowed my love was a scoundrel.

JEAN. That's what you always say--afterwards.

JULIA. Always?

JEAN. Always, I believe, for I have heard the same words used
several times before, on similar occasions.

JULIA. What occasions?

JEAN. Like the one of which we were speaking. The last time--

JULIA. [Rising] Stop! I don't want to hear any more!

JEAN. Nor did _she_--curiously enough! Well, then I ask permission
to go to bed.

JULIA. [Gently] Go to bed on Midsummer Eve?

JEAN. Yes, for dancing with that mob out there has really no
attraction for me.

JULIA. Get the key to the boat and take me out on the lake--I want
to watch the sunrise.

JEAN. Would that be wise?

JULIA. It sounds as if you were afraid of your reputation.

JEAN. Why not? I don't care to be made ridiculous, and I don't care
to be discharged without a recommendation, for I am trying to get
on in the world. And then I feel myself under a certain obligation
to Christine.

JULIA. So it's Christine now

JEAN. Yes, but it's you also--Take my advice and go to bed!

JULIA. Am I to obey you?

JEAN. For once--and for your own sake! The night is far gone.
Sleepiness makes us drunk, and the head grows hot. Go to bed! And
besides--if I am not mistaken-I can hear the crowd coming this way
to look for me. And if we are found together here, you are lost!

CHORUS. [Is heard approaching]:
      Through the fields come two ladies a-walking,
      Treederee-derallah, treederee-derah.
      And one has her shoes full of water,
      Treederee-derallah-lah.

      They're talking of hundreds of dollars,
      Treederee-derallah, treederee-derah.
      But have not between them a dollar
      Treederee-derallah-lah.

      This wreath I give you gladly,
      Treederee-derallah, treederee-derah.
      But love another madly,
      Treederee-derallah-lah.

JULIA. I know the people, and I love them, just as they love me.
Let them come, and you'll see.

JEAN. No, Miss Julia, they don't love you. They take your food and
spit at your back. Believe me. Listen to me--can't you hear what
they are singing?--No, don't pay any attention to it!

JULIA. [Listening] What is it they are singing?

JEAN. Oh, something scurrilous. About you and me.

JULIA. How infamous! They ought to be ashamed! And the treachery of
it!

JEAN. The mob is always cowardly. And in such a fight as this there
is nothing to do but to run away.

JULIA. Run away? Where to? We cannot get out. And we cannot go into
Christine's room.

JEAN. Oh, we cannot? Well, into my room, then! Necessity knows no
law. And you can trust me, for I am your true and frank and
respectful friend.

JULIA. But think only-think if they should look for you in there!

JEAN. I shall bolt the door. And if they try to break it I open,
I'll shoot!--Come! [Kneeling before her] Come!

JULIA. [Meaningly] And you promise me--?

JEAN. I swear!

[MISS JULIA goes quickly out to the right. JEAN follows her
eagerly.]

***

BALLET

The peasants enter. They are decked out in their best and carry
flowers in their hats. A fiddler leads them. On the table they
place a barrel of small-beer and a keg of "brännvin," or white
Swedish whiskey, both of them decorated with wreathes woven out of
leaves. First they drink. Then they form in ring and sing and dance
to the melody heard before:

      "Through the fields come two ladies a-walking."

The dance finished, they leave singing.

***

JULIA. [Enters alone. On seeing the disorder in the kitchen, she
claps her hands together. Then she takes out a powder-puff and
begins to powder her face.]

JEAN. [Enters in a state of exaltation] There you see! And you
heard, didn't you? Do you think it possible to stay here?

JULIA. No, I don't think so. But what are we to do?

JEAN. Run away, travel, far away from here.

JULIA. Travel? Yes-but where?

JEAN. To Switzerland, the Italian lakes--you have never been there?

JULIA. No. Is the country beautiful?

JEAN. Oh! Eternal summer! Orange trees! Laurels! Oh!

JULIA. But then-what are we to do down there?

JEAN. I'll start a hotel, everything first class, including the
customers?

JULIA. Hotel?

JEAN. That's the life, I tell you! Constantly new faces and new
languages. Never a minute free for nerves or brooding. No trouble
about what to do--for the work is calling to be done: night and
day, bells that ring, trains that whistle, 'busses that come and
go; and gold pieces raining on the counter all the time. That's the
life for you!

JULIA. Yes, that is life. And I?

JEAN. The mistress of everything, the chief ornament of the house.
With your looks--and your manners--oh, success will be assured!
Enormous! You'll sit like a queen in the office and keep the slaves
going by the touch of an electric button. The guests will pass in
review before your throne and timidly deposit their treasures on
your table. You cannot imagine how people tremble when a bill is
presented to them--I'll salt the items, and you'll sugar them with
your sweetest smiles. Oh, let us get away from here--[pulling a
time-table from his pocket]--at once, with the next train! We'll be
in Malmö at 6.30; in Hamburg at 8.40 to-morrow morning; in Frankfort
and Basel a day later. And to reach Como by way of the St. Gotthard
it will take us--let me see--three days. Three days!

JULIA. All that is all right. But you must give me some courage
Jean. Tell me that you love me. Come and take me in your arms.

JEAN. [Reluctantly] I should like to--but I don't dare. Not in this
house again. I love you--beyond doubt--or, can you doubt it, Miss
Julia?

JULIA. [With modesty and true womanly feeling] Miss? Call me Julia.
Between us there can be no barriers here after. Call me Julia!

JEAN. [Disturbed] I cannot! There will be barriers between us as
long as we stay in this house--there is the past, and there is the
count-and I have never met another person for whom I felt such
respect. If I only catch sight of his gloves on a chair I feel
small. If I only hear that bell up there, I jump like a shy horse.
And even now, when I see his boots standing there so stiff and
perky, it is as if something made my back bend. [Kicking at the
boots] It's nothing but superstition and tradition hammered into us
from childhood--but it can be as easily forgotten again. Let us
only get to another country, where they have a republic, and you'll
see them bend their backs double before my liveried porter. You
see, backs have to be bent, but not mine. I wasn't born to that
kind of thing. There's better stuff in me--character--and if I only
get hold of the first branch, you'll see me do some climbing.
To-day I am a valet, but next year I'll be a hotel owner. In ten
years I can live on the money I have made, and then I'll go to
Roumania and get myself an order. And I may--note well that I say
_may_--end my days as a count.

JULIA. Splendid, splendid!

JEAN. Yes, in Roumania the title of count can be had for cash, and
so you'll be a countess after all. My countess!

JULIA. What do I care about all I now cast behind me! Tell me that
you love me: otherwise--yes, what am I otherwise?

JEAN. I will tell you so a thousand times--later. But not here. And
above all, no sentimentality, or everything will be lost. We must
look at the matter in cold blood, like sensible people. [Takes out
a cigar, cuts of the point, and lights it] Sit down there now, and
I'll sit here, and then we'll talk as if nothing had happened.

JULIA. [In despair] Good Lord! Have you then no feelings at all?

JEAN. I? No one is more full of feeling than I am. But I know how
to control myself.

JULIA. A while ago you kissed my shoe--and now!

JEAN. [Severely] Yes, that was then. Now we have other things to
think of.

JULIA. Don't speak harshly to me!

JEAN. No, but sensibly. One folly has been committed--don't let us
commit any more! The count may be here at any moment, and before he
comes our fate must be settled. What do you think of my plans for
the future? Do you approve of them?

JULIA. They seem acceptable, on the whole. But there is one
question: a big undertaking of that kind will require a big capital
have you got it?

JEAN. [Chewing his cigar] I? Of course! I have my expert knowledge,
my vast experience, my familiarity with several languages. That's
the very best kind of capital, I should say.

JULIA. But it won't buy you a railroad ticket even.

JEAN. That's true enough. And that is just why I am looking for a
backer to advance the needful cash.

JULIA. Where could you get one all of a sudden?

JEAN. It's for you to find him if you want to become my partner.

JULIA. I cannot do it, and I have nothing myself. [Pause.]

JEAN. Well, then that's off--

JULIA. And-

JEAN. Everything remains as before.

JULIA. Do you think I am going to stay under this roof as your
concubine? Do you think I'll let the people point their fingers at
me? Do you think I can look my father in the face after this? No,
take me away from here, from all this humiliation and disgrace!
Oh, what have I done? My God, my God! [Breaks into tears.]

JEAN. So we have got around to that tune now!--What you have done?
Nothing but what many others have done before you.

JULIA. [Crying hysterically] And now you're despising me!--I'm
falling, I'm falling!

JEAN. Fall down to me, and I'll lift you up again afterwards.

JULIA. What horrible power drew me to you? Was it the attraction
which the strong exercises on the weak--the one who is rising on
one who is falling? Or was it love? This love! Do you know what
love is?

JEAN. I? Well, I should say so! Don't you think I have been there
before?

JULIA. Oh, the language you use, and the thoughts you think!

JEAN. Well, that's the way I was brought up, and that's the way I
am. Don't get nerves now and play the exquisite, for now one of us
is just as good as the other. Look here, my girl, let me treat you
to a glass of something superfine. [He opens the table-drawer,
takes out the wine bottle and fills up two glasses that have
already been used.]

JULIA. Where did you get that wine?

JEAN. In the cellar.

JULIA. My father's Burgundy!

JEAN. Well, isn't it good enough for the son-in-law?

JULIA. And I am drinking beer--I!

JEAN. It shows merely that I have better taste than you.

JULIA. Thief!

JEAN. Do you mean to tell on me?

JULIA. Oh, oh! The accomplice of a house thief! Have I been drunk,
or have I been dreaming all this night? Midsummer Eve! The feast of
innocent games-

JEAN. Innocent--hm!

JULIA. [Walking back and forth] Can there be another human being on
earth so unhappy as I am at this moment'

JEAN. But why should you be? After such a conquest? Think of
Christine in there. Don't you think she has feelings also?

JULIA. I thought so a while ago, but I don't think so any longer.
No, a menial is a menial--

JEAN. And a whore a whore!

JULIA. [On her knees, with folded hands] O God in heaven, make an
end of this wretched life! Take me out of the filth into which I am
sinking! Save me! Save me!

JEAN. I cannot deny that I feel sorry for you. When I was lying
among the onions and saw you up there among the roses--I'll tell
you now--I had the same nasty thoughts that all boys have.

JULIA. And you who wanted to die for my sake!

JEAN. Among the oats. That was nothing but talk.

JULIA. Lies in other words!

JEAN. [Beginning to feel sleepy] Just about. I think I read the
story in a paper, and it was about a chimney-sweep who crawled into
a wood-box full of lilacs because a girl had brought suit against
him for not supporting her kid-

JULIA. So that's the sort you are--

JEAN. Well, I had to think of something--for it's the high-faluting
stuff that the women bite on.

JULIA. Scoundrel!

JEAN. Rot!

JULIA. And now you have seen the back of the hawk--

JEAN. Well, I don't know--

JULIA. And I was to be the first branch--

JEAN. But the branch was rotten--

JULIA. I was to be the sign in front of the hotel--

JEAN. And I the hotel--

JULIA. Sit at your counter, and lure your customers, and doctor
your bills--

JEAN. No, that I should have done myself--

JULIA. That a human soul can be so steeped in dirt!

JEAN. Well, wash it off!

JULIA. You lackey, you menial, stand up when I talk to you!

JEAN. You lackey-love, you mistress of a menial--shut up and get
out of here! You're the right one to come and tell me that I am
vulgar. People of my kind would never in their lives act as
vulgarly as you have acted to-night. Do you think any servant girl
would go for a man as you did? Did you ever see a girl of my class
throw herself at anybody in that way? I have never seen the like of
it except among beasts and prostitutes.

JULIA. [Crushed] That's right: strike me, step on me--I haven't
deserved any better! I am a wretched creature. But help me! Help
me out of this, if there be any way to do so!

JEAN. [In a milder tone] I don't want to lower myself by a denial
of my share in the honour of seducing. But do you think a person in
my place would have dared to raise his eyes to you, if the
invitation to do so had not come from yourself? I am still sitting
here in a state of utter surprise--

JULIA. And pride--

JEAN. Yes, why not? Although I must confess that the victory was
too easy to bring with it any real intoxication.

JULIA. Strike me some more!

JEAN. [Rising] No! Forgive me instead what I have been saying. I
don't want to strike one who is disarmed, and least of all a lady.
On one hand I cannot deny that it has given me pleasure to discover
that what has dazzled us below is nothing but cat-gold; that the
hawk is simply grey on the back also; that there is powder on the
tender cheek; that there may be black borders on the polished
nails; and that the handkerchief may be dirty, although it smells
of perfume. But on the other hand it hurts me to have discovered
that what I was striving to reach is neither better nor more
genuine. It hurts me to see you sinking so low that you are far
beneath your own cook--it hurts me as it hurts to see the Fall
flowers beaten down by the rain and turned into mud.

JULIA. You speak as if you were already above me?

JEAN. Well, so I am. Don't you see: I could have made a countess of
you, but you could never make me a count.

JULIA. But I am born of a count, and that's more than you can ever
achieve.

JEAN. That's true. But I might be the father of countsif--

JULIA. But you are a thief--and I am not.

JEAN. Thief is not the worst. There are other kinds still farther
down. And then, when I serve in a house, I regard myself in a sense
as a member of the family, as a child of the house, and you don't
call it theft when children pick a few of the berries that load
down the vines. [His passion is aroused once more] Miss Julia, you
are a magnificent woman, and far too good for one like me. You were
swept along by a spell of intoxication, and now you want to cover
up your mistake by making yourself believe that you are in love
with me. Well, you are not, unless possibly my looks might tempt
you-in which case your love is no better than mine. I could never
rest satisfied with having you care for nothing in me but the mere
animal, and your love I can never win.

JULIA. Are you so sure of that?

JEAN. You mean to say that it might be possible? That I might love
you: yes, without doubt--for you are beautiful, refined, [goes up
to her and takes hold of her hand] educated, charming when you want
to be so, and it is not likely that the flame will ever burn out in
a man who has once been set of fire by you. [Puts his arm around
her waist] You are like burnt wine with strong spices in it, and
one of your kisses--

[He tries to lead her away, but she frees herself gently from his
hold.]

JULIA. Leave me alone! In that way you cannot win me.

JEAN. How then?--Not in that way! Not by caresses and sweet words!
Not by thought for the future, by escape from disgrace! How then?

JULIA. How? How? I don't know--Not at all! I hate you as I hate
rats, but I cannot escape from you!

JEAN. Escape with me!

JULIA. [Straightening up] Escape? Yes, we must escape!--But I am so
tired. Give me a glass of wine.

[JEAN pours out wine.]

JULIA. [Looks at her watch] But we must have a talk first. We have
still some time left. [Empties her glass and holds it out for more.]

JEAN. Don't drink so much. It will go to your head.

JULIA. What difference would that make?

JEAN. What difference would it make? It's vulgar to get drunk--What
was it you wanted to tell me?

JULIA. We must get away. But first we must have a talk--that is, I
must talk, for so far you have done all the talking. You have told
me about your life. Now I must tell you about mine, so that we know
each other right to the bottom before we begin the journey together.

JEAN. One moment, pardon me! Think first, so that you don't regret
it afterwards, when you have already given up the secrets of your
life.

JULIA. Are you not my friend?

JEAN. Yes, at times--but don't rely on me.

JULIA. You only talk like that--and besides, my secrets are known
to everybody. You see, my mother was not of noble birth, but came
of quite plain people. She was brought up in the ideas of her time
about equality, and woman's independence, and that kind of thing.
And she had a decided aversion to marriage. Therefore, when my
father proposed to her, she said she wouldn't marry him--and then
she did it just the same. I came into the world--against my
mother's wish, I have come to think. Then my mother wanted to bring
me up in a perfectly natural state, and at the same time I was to
learn everything that a boy is taught, so that I might prove that a
woman is just as good as a man. I was dressed as a boy, and was
taught how to handle a horse, but could have nothing to do with the
cows. I had to groom and harness and go hunting on horseback. I was
even forced to learn something about agriculture. And all over the
estate men were set to do women's work, and women to do men's--with
the result that everything went to pieces and we became the
laughing-stock of the whole neighbourhood. At last my father must
have recovered from the spell cast over him, for he rebelled, and
everything was changed to suit his own ideas. My mother was taken
sick--what kind of sickness it was I don't know, but she fell often
into convulsions, and she used to hide herself in the garret or in
the garden, and sometimes she stayed out all night. Then came the
big fire, of which you have heard. The house, the stable, and the
barn were burned down, and this under circumstances which made it
look as if the fire had been set on purpose. For the disaster
occurred the day after our insurance expired, and the money sent
for renewal of the policy had been delayed by the messenger's
carelessness, so that it came too late. [She fills her glass again
and drinks.]

JEAN. Don't drink any more.

JULIA. Oh, what does it matter!--We were without a roof over our
heads and had to sleep in the carriages. My father didn't know
where to get money for the rebuilding of the house. Then my mother
suggested that he try to borrow from a childhood friend of hers, a
brick manufacturer living not far from here. My father got the
loan, but was not permitted to pay any interest, which astonished
him. And so the house was built up again. [Drinks again] Do you
know who set fire to the house?

JEAN. Her ladyship, your mother!

JULIA. Do you know who the brick manufacturer was?

JEAN. Your mother's lover?

JULIA. Do you know to whom the money belonged?

JEAN. Wait a minute--no, that I don't know.

JULIA. To my mother.

JEAN. In other words, to the count, if there was no settlement.

JULIA. There was no settlement. My mother possessed a small fortune
of her own which she did not want to leave in my father's control,
so she invested it with--her friend.

JEAN. Who copped it.

JULIA. Exactly! He kept it. All this came to my father's knowledge.
He couldn't bring suit; he couldn't pay his wife's lover; he
couldn't prove that it was his wife's money. That was my mother's
revenge because he had made himself master in his own house. At
that time he came near shooting himself--it was even rumoured that
he had tried and failed. But he took a new lease of life, and my
mother had to pay for what she had done. I can tell you that those
were five years I'll never forget! My sympathies were with my
father, but I took my mother's side because I was not aware of the
true circumstances. From her I learned to suspect and hate men--for
she hated the whole sex, as you have probably heard--and I promised
her on my oath that I would never become a man's slave.

JEAN. And so you became engaged to the County Attorney.

JULIA. Yes, in order that he should be my slave.

JEAN. And he didn't want to?

JULIA. Oh, he wanted, but I wouldn't let him. I got tired of him.

JEAN. Yes, I saw it--in the stable-yard.

JULIA. What did you see?

JEAN. Just that--how he broke the engagement.

JULIA. That's a lie! It was I who broke it. Did he say he did it,
the scoundrel?

JEAN. Oh, he was no scoundrel, I guess. So you hate men, Miss
Julia?

JULIA. Yes! Most of the time. But now and then--when the weakness
comes over me--oh, what shame!

JEAN. And you hate me too?

JULIA. Beyond measure! I should like to kill you like a wild beast--

JEAN. As you make haste to shoot a mad dog. Is that right?

JULIA. That's right!

JEAN. But now there is nothing to shoot with--and there is no dog.
What are we to do then?

JULIA. Go abroad.

JEAN. In order to plague each other to death?

JULIA. No-in order to enjoy ourselves: a couple of days, a week, as
long as enjoyment is possible. And then--die!

JEAN. Die? How silly! Then I think it's much better to start a
hotel.

JULIA. [Without listening to JEAN]--At Lake Como, where the sun is
always shining, and the laurels stand green at Christmas, and the
oranges are glowing.

JEAN. Lake Como is a rainy hole, and I could see no oranges except
in the groceries. But it is a good place for tourists, as it has a
lot of villas that can be rented to loving couples, and that's a
profitable business--do you know why? Because they take a lease for
six months--and then they leave after three weeks.

JULIA. [Naïvely] Why after three weeks?

JEAN. Because they quarrel, of course. But the rent has to be paid
just the same. And then you can rent the house again. And that way
it goes on all the time, for there is plenty of love--even if it
doesn't last long.

JULIA. You don't want to die with me?

JEAN. I don't want to die at all. Both because I am fond of living,
and because I regard suicide as a crime against the Providence
which has bestowed life on us.

JULIA. Do you mean to say that you believe in God?

JEAN. Of course, I do. And I go to church every other Sunday.
Frankly speaking, now I am tired of all this, and now I am going to
bed.

JULIA. So! And you think that will be enough for me? Do you know
what you owe a woman that you have spoiled?

JEAN. [Takes out his purse and throws a silver coin on the table]
You're welcome! I don't want to be in anybody's debt.

JULIA. [Pretending not to notice the insult] Do you know what the
law provides--

JEAN. Unfortunately the law provides no punishment for a woman
who seduces a man.

JULIA. [As before] Can you think of any escape except by our
going abroad and getting married, and then getting a divorce?

JEAN. Suppose I refuse to enter into this _mésaillance_?

JULIA. _Mésaillance_--

JEAN. Yes, for me. You see, I have better ancestry than you, for
nobody in my family was ever guilty of arson.

JULIA. How do you know?

JEAN. Well, nothing is known to the contrary, for we keep no
Pedigrees--except in the police bureau. But I have read about your
pedigree in a book that was lying on the drawing-room table. Do you
know who was your first ancestor? A miller who let his wife sleep
with the king one night during the war with Denmark. I have no such
ancestry. I have none at all, but I can become an ancestor myself.

JULIA. That's what I get for unburdening my heart to one not worthy
of it; for sacrificing my family's honour--

JEAN. Dishonour! Well, what was it I told you? You shouldn't drink,
for then you talk. And you must not talk!

JULIA. Oh, how I regret what I have done! How I regret it! If at
least you loved me!

JEAN. For the last time: what do you mean? Am I to weep? Am I to
jump over your whip? Am I to kiss you, and lure you down to Lake
Como for three weeks, and so on? What am I to do? What do you
expect? This is getting to be rather painful! But that's what comes
from getting mixed up with women. Miss Julia! I see that you are
unhappy; I know that you are suffering; but I cannot understand
you. We never carry on like that. There is never any hatred between
us. Love is to us a play, and we play at it when our work leaves us
time to do so. But we have not the time to do so all day and all
night, as you have. I believe you are sick--I am sure you are sick.

JULIA. You should be good to me--and now you speak like a human
being.

JEAN. All right, but be human yourself. You spit on me, and then
you won't let me wipe myself--on you!

JULIA. Help me, help me! Tell me only what I am to do--where I am
to turn?

JEAN. O Lord, if I only knew that myself!

JULIA. I have been exasperated, I have been mad, but there ought to
be some way of saving myself.

JEAN. Stay right here and keep quiet. Nobody knows anything.

JULIA. Impossible! The people know, and Christine knows.

JEAN. They don't know, and they would never believe it possible.

JULIA. [Hesitating] But-it might happen again.

JEAN. That's true.

JULIA. And the results?

JEAN. [Frightened] The results! Where was my head when I didn't
think of that! Well, then there is only one thing to do--you must
leave. At once! I can't go with you, for then everything would be
lost, so you must go alone--abroad--anywhere!

JULIA. Alone? Where?--I can't do it.

JEAN. You must! And before the count gets back. If you stay, then
you know what will happen. Once on the wrong path, one wants to
keep on, as the harm is done anyhow. Then one grows more and more
reckless--and at last it all comes out. So you must get away! Then
you can write to the count and tell him everything, except that it
was me. And he would never guess it. Nor do I think he would be
very anxious to find out.

JULIA. I'll go if you come with me.

JEAN. Are you stark mad, woman? Miss Julia to run away with her
valet! It would be in the papers in another day, and the count
could never survive it.

JULIA. I can't leave! I can't stay! Help me! I am so tired, so
fearfully tired. Give me orders! Set me going, for I can no longer
think, no longer act-

JEAN. Do you see now what good-for-nothings you are! Why do you
strut and turn up your noses as if you were the lords of creation?
Well, I am going to give you orders. Go up and dress. Get some
travelling money, and then come back again.

JULIA: [In an undertone] Come up with me!

JEAN. To your room? Now you're crazy again! [Hesitates a moment]
No, you must go at once! [Takes her by the hand and leads her out.]

JULIA. [On her way out] Can't you speak kindly to me, Jean?

JEAN. An order must always sound unkind. Now you can find out how
it feels!

[JULIA goes out.]

[JEAN, alone, draws a sigh of relief; sits down at the table; takes
out a note-book and a pencil; figures aloud from time to time; dumb
play until CHRISTINE enters dressed for church; she has a false
shirt front and a white tie in one of her hands.]

CHRISTINE. Goodness gracious, how the place looks! What have you
been up to anyhow?

JEAN. Oh, it was Miss Julia who dragged in the people. Have you
been sleeping so hard that you didn't hear anything at all?

CHRISTINE. I have been sleeping like a log.

JEAN. And dressed for church already?

CHRISTINE. Yes, didn't you promise to come with me to communion
to-day?

JEAN. Oh, yes, I remember now. And there you've got the finery.
Well, come on with it. [Sits down; CHRISTINE helps him to put on
the shirt front and the white tie.]

[Pause.]

JEAN. [Sleepily] What's the text to-day?

CHRISTINE. Oh, about John the Baptist beheaded, I guess.

JEAN. That's going to be a long story, I'm sure. My, but you choke
me! Oh, I'm so sleepy, so sleepy!

CHRISTINE. Well, what has been keeping you up all night? Why, man,
you're just green in the face!

JEAN. I have been sitting here talking with Miss Julia.

CHRISTINE. She hasn't an idea of what's proper, that creature!

[Pause.]

JEAN. Say, Christine.

CHRISTINE. Well?

JEAN. Isn't it funny anyhow, when you come to think of it? Her!

CHRISTINE. What is it that's funny?

JEAN. Everything!

[Pause.]

CHRISTINE. [Seeing the glasses on the table that are only
half-emptied] So you've been drinking together also?

JEAN. Yes.

CHRISTINE. Shame on you! Look me in the eye!

JEAN. Yes.

CHRISTINE. Is it possible? Is it possible?

JEAN. [After a moment's thought] Yes, it is!

CHRISTINE. Ugh! That's worse than I could ever have believed. It's
awful!

JEAN. You are not jealous of her, are you?

CHRISTINE. No, not of her. Had it been Clara or Sophie, then I'd
have scratched your eyes out. Yes, that's the way I feel about it,
and I can't tell why. Oh my, but that was nasty!

JEAN. Are you mad at her then?

CHRISTINE. No, but at you! It was wrong of you, very wrong! Poor
girl! No, I tell you, I don't want to stay in this house any
longer, with people for whom it is impossible to have any respect.

JEAN. Why should you have any respect for them?

CHRISTINE. And you who are such a smarty can't tell that! You
wouldn't serve people who don't act decently, would you? It's to
lower oneself, I think.

JEAN. Yes, but it ought to be a consolation to us that they are not
a bit better than we.

CHRISTINE. No, I don't think so. For if they're no better, then
it's no use trying to get up to them. And just think of the count!
Think of him who has had so much sorrow in his day! No, I don't
want to stay any longer in this house--And with a fellow like you,
too. If it had been the county attorney--if it had only been some
one of her own sort--

JEAN. Now look here!

CHRISTINE. Yes, yes! You're all right in your way, but there's
after all some difference between one kind of people and another-
No, but this is something I'll never get over!--And the young lady
who was so proud, and so tart to the men, that you couldn't believe
she would ever let one come near her--and such a one at that! And
she who wanted to have poor Diana shot because she had been running
around with the gate-keeper's pug!--Well, I declare!--But I won't
stay here any longer, and next October I get out of here.

JEAN. And then?

CHRISTINE. Well, as we've come to talk of that now, perhaps it
would be just as well if you looked for something, seeing that
we're going to get married after all.

JEAN. Well, what could I look for? As a married man I couldn't get
a place like this.

CHRISTINE. No, I understand that. But you could get a job as a
janitor, or maybe as a messenger in some government bureau. Of
course, the public loaf is always short in weight, but it comes
steady, and then there is a pension for the widow and the children--

JEAN. [Making a face] That's good and well, but it isn't my style
to think of dying all at once for the sake of wife and children. I
must say that my plans have been looking toward something better
than that kind of thing.

CHRISTINE. Your plans, yes--but you've got obligations also, and
those you had better keep in mind!

JEAN. Now don't you get my dander up by talking of obligations! I
know what I've got to do anyhow. [Listening for some sound on the
outside] However, we've plenty of time to think of all this. Go in
now and get ready, and then we'll go to church.

CHRISTINE. Who is walking around up there?

JEAN. I don't know, unless it be Clara.

CHRISTINE. [Going out] It can't be the count, do you think, who's
come home without anybody hearing him?

JEAN. [Scared] The count? No, that isn't possible, for then he
would have rung for me.

CHRISTINE. [As she goes out] Well, God help us all! Never have I
seen the like of it!

[The sun has risen and is shining on the tree tops in the park. The
light changes gradually until it comes slantingly in through the
windows. JEAN goes to the door and gives a signal.]

JULIA. [Enters in travelling dress and carrying a small birdcage
covered up with a towel; this she places on a chair] Now I am
ready.

JEAN. Hush! Christine is awake.

JULIA. [Showing extreme nervousness during the following scene] Did
she suspect anything?

JEAN. She knows nothing at all. But, my heavens, how you look!

JULIA. How do I look?

JEAN. You're as pale as a corpse, and--pardon me, but your face is
dirty.

JULIA. Let me wash it then--Now! [She goes over to the washstand
and washes her face and hands] Give me a towel--Oh!--That's the sun
rising!

JEAN. And then the ogre bursts.

JULIA. Yes, ogres and trolls were abroad last night!But listen,
Jean. Come with me, for now I have the money.

JEAN. [Doubtfully] Enough?

JULIA. Enough to start with. Come with me, for I cannot travel
alone to-day. Think of it--Midsummer Day, on a stuffy train, jammed
with people who stare at you--and standing still at stations when
you want to fly. No, I cannot! I cannot! And then the memories will
come: childhood memories of Midsummer Days, when the inside of the
church was turned into a green forest--birches and lilacs; the
dinner at the festive table with relatives and friends; the
afternoon in the park, with dancing and music, flowers and games!
Oh, you may run and run, but your memories are in the baggage-car,
and with them remorse and repentance!

JEAN. I'll go with you-but at once, before it's too late. This very
moment!

JULIA. Well, get dressed then. [Picks up the cage.]

JEAN. But no baggage! That would only give us away.

JULIA. No, nothing at all! Only what we can take with us in the
car.

JEAN. [Has taken down his hat] What have you got there? What is it?

JULIA. It's only my finch. I can't leave it behind.

JEAN. Did you ever! Dragging a bird-cage along with us! You must be
raving mad! Drop the cage!

JULIA. The only thing I take with me from my home! The only living
creature that loves me since Diana deserted me! Don't be cruel! Let
me take it along!

JEAN. Drop the cage, I tell you! And don't talk so loud--Christine
can hear us.

JULIA. No, I won't let it fall into strange hands. I'd rather have
you kill it!

JEAN. Well, give it to me, and I'll wring its neck.

JULIA. Yes, but don't hurt it. Don't--no, I cannot!

JEAN. Let me--I can!

JULIA. [Takes the bird out of the cage and kisses it] Oh, my little
birdie, must it die and go away from its mistress!

JEAN. Don't make a scene, please. Don't you know it's a question of
your life, of your future? Come, quick! [Snatches the bird away
from her, carries it to the chopping block and picks up an axe.
MISS JULIA turns away.]

JEAN. You should have learned how to kill chickens instead of
shooting with a revolver--[brings down the axe]--then you wouldn't
have fainted for a drop of blood.

JULIA. [Screaming] Kill me too! Kill me! You who can take the life
of an innocent creature without turning a hair! Oh, I hate and
despise you! There is blood between us! Cursed be the hour when I
first met you! Cursed be the hour when I came to life in my
mother's womb!

JEAN. Well, what's the use of all that cursing? Come on!

JULIA. [Approaching the chopping-block as if drawn to it against
her will] No, I don't want to go yet. I cannot-I must see--Hush!
There's a carriage coming up the road. [Listening without taking
her eyes of the block and the axe] You think I cannot stand the
sight of blood. You think I am as weak as that--oh, I should like
to see your blood, your brains, on that block there. I should like
to see your whole sex swimming in blood like that thing there. I
think I could drink out of your skull, and bathe my feet in your
open breast, and eat your heart from the spit!--You think I am
weak; you think I love you because the fruit of my womb was
yearning for your seed; you think I want to carry your offspring
under my heart and nourish it with my blood--bear your children and
take your name! Tell me, you, what are you called anyhow? I have
never heard your family name-and maybe you haven't any. I should
become Mrs. "Hovel," or Mrs. "Backyard"--you dog there, that's
wearing my collar; you lackey with my coat of arms on your buttons--
and I should share with my cook, and be the rival of my own
servant. Oh! Oh! Oh!--You think I am a coward and want to run away!
No, now I'll stay--and let the lightning strike! My father will
come home--will find his chiffonier opened--the money gone! Then
he'll ring--twice for the valet--and then he'll send for the
sheriff--and then I shall tell everything! Everything! Oh, but it
will be good to get an end to it--if it only be the end! And then
his heart will break, and he dies!--So there will be an end to all
of us--and all will be quietpeace--eternal rest!--And then the
coat of arms will be shattered on the coffin--and the count's line
will be wiped out--but the lackey's line goes on in the orphan
asylum--wins laurels in the gutter, and ends in jail.

JEAN. There spoke the royal blood! Bravo, Miss Julia! Now you put
the miller back in his sack!

[CHRISTINE enters dressed for church and carrying n hymn-book in
her hand.]

JULIA. [Hurries up to her and throws herself into her arms ax if
seeking protection] Help me, Christine! Help me against this man!

CHRISTINE. [Unmoved and cold] What kind of performance is this on
the Sabbath morning? [Catches sight of the chopping-block] My, what
a mess you have made!--What's the meaning of all this? And the way
you shout and carry on!

JULIA. You are a woman, Christine, and you are my friend. Beware of
that scoundrel!

JEAN. [A little shy and embarrassed] While the ladies are
discussing I'll get myself a shave. [Slinks out to the right.]

JULIA. You must understand me, and you must listen to me.

CHRISTINE. No, really, I don't understand this kind of trolloping.
Where are you going in your travelling-dress--and he with his hat
on--what?--What?

JULIA. Listen, Christine, listen, and I'll tell you everything--

CHRISTINE. I don't want to know anything--

JULIA. You must listen to me--

CHRISTINE. What is it about? Is it about this nonsense with Jean?
Well, I don't care about it at all, for it's none of my business.
But if you're planning to get him away with you, we'll put a stop
to that!

JULIA. [Extremely nervous] Please try to be quiet, Christine, and
listen to me. I cannot stay here, and Jean cannot stay here--and so
we must leave-

CHRISTINE. Hm, hm!

JULIA. [Brightening. up] But now I have got an idea, you know.
Suppose all three of us should leave--go abroad--go to Switzerland
and start a hotel together--I have money, you know--and Jean and I
could run the whole thing--and you, I thought, could take charge of
the kitchen--Wouldn't that be fine!--Say yes, now! And come along
with us! Then everything is fixed!--Oh, say yes!

[She puts her arms around CHRISTINE and pats her.]

CHRISTINE. [Coldly and thoughtfully] Hm, hm!

JULIA. [Presto tempo] You have never travelled, Christine--you must
get out and have a look at the world. You cannot imagine what fun
it is to travel on a train--constantly new people--new countries-
and then we get to Hamburg and take in the Zoological Gardens in
passing--that's what you like--and then we go to the theatres and
to the opera--and when we get to Munich, there, you know, we have a
lot of museums, where they keep Rubens and Raphael and all those
big painters, you know--Haven't you heard of Munich, where King
Louis used to live--the king, you know, that went mad--And then
we'll have a look at his castle--he has still some castles that are
furnished just as in a fairy tale--and from there it isn't very far
to Switzerland--and the Alps, you know--just think of the Alps,
with snow on top of them in the middle of the summer--and there you
have orange trees and laurels that are green all the year around--

[JEAN is seen in the right wing, sharpening his razor on a strop
which he holds between his teeth and his left hand; he listens to
the talk with a pleased mien and nods approval now and then.]

JULIA. [Tempo prestissimo] And then we get a hotel--and I sit in
the office, while Jean is outside receiving tourists--and goes out
marketing--and writes letters--That's a life for you--Then the
train whistles, and the 'bus drives up, and it rings upstairs, and
it rings in the restaurant--and then I make out the bills--and I am
going to salt them, too--You can never imagine how timid tourists
are when they come to pay their bills! And you--you will sit like a
queen in the kitchen. Of course, you are not going to stand at the
stove yourself. And you'll have to dress neatly and nicely in order
to show yourself to people--and with your looks--yes, I am not
flattering you--you'll catch a husband some fine day--some rich
Englishman, you know-for those fellows are so easy [slowing down]
to catch--and then we grow rich--and we build us a villa at Lake
Como--of course, it is raining a little in that place now and then-
but [limply] the sun must be shining sometimes--although it looks
dark--and--then--or else we can go home again--and come back--here-
or some other place--

CHRISTINE. Tell me, Miss Julia, do you believe in all that
yourself?

JULIA. [Crushed] Do I believe in it myself?

CHRISTINE. Yes.

JULIA. [Exhausted] I don't know: I believe no longer in anything.
[She sinks down on the bench and drops her head between her arms on
the table] Nothing! Nothing at all!

CHRISTINE. [Turns to the right, where JEAN is standing] So you were
going to run away!

JEAN. [Abashed, puts the razor on the table] Run away? Well, that's
putting it rather strong. You have heard what the young lady
proposes, and though she is tired out now by being up all night,
it's a proposition that can be put through all right.

CHRISTINE. Now you tell me: did you mean me to act as cook for that
one there--?

JEAN. [Sharply] Will you please use decent language in speaking to
your mistress! Do you understand?

CHRISTINE. Mistress!

JEAN. Yes!

CHRISTINE. Well, well! Listen to him!

JEAN. Yes, it would be better for you to listen a little more and
talk a little less. Miss Julia is your mistress, and what makes you
disrespectful to her now should snake you feel the same way about
yourself.

CHRISTINE. Oh, I have always had enough respect for myself--

JEAN. To have none for others!

CHRISTINE. --not to go below my own station. You can't say that the
count's cook has had anything to do with the groom or the
swineherd. You can't say anything of the kind!

JEAN. Yes, it's your luck that you have had to do with a gentleman.

CHRISTINE. Yes, a gentleman who sells the oats out of the count's
stable!

JEAN. What's that to you who get a commission on the groceries and
bribes from the butcher?

CHRISTINE. What's that?

JEAN. And so you can't respect your master and mistress any longer!
You--you!

CHRISTINE. Are you coming with me to church? I think you need a
good sermon on top of such a deed.

JEAN. No, I am not going to church to-day. You can go by yourself
and confess your own deeds.

CHRISTINE. Yes, I'll do that, and I'll bring back enough
forgiveness to cover you also. The Saviour suffered and died on the
cross for all our sins, and if we go to him with a believing heart
and a repentant mind, he'll take all our guilt on himself.

JULIA. Do you believe that, Christine?

CHRISTINE. It is my living belief, as sure as I stand here, and the
faith of my childhood which I have kept since I was young, Miss
Julia. And where sin abounds, grace abounds too.

JULIA. Oh, if I had your faith! Oh, if-

CHRISTINE. Yes, but you don't get it without the special grace of
God, and that is not bestowed on everybody--

JULIA. On whom is it bestowed then?

CHRISTINE. That's just the great secret of the work of grace, Miss
Julia, and the Lord has no regard for persons, but there those that
are last shall be the foremost--

JULIA. Yes, but that means he has regard for those that are last.

CHRISTINE. [Going right on] --and it is easier for a camel to go
through a needle's eye than for a rich man to get into heaven.
That's the way it is, Miss Julia. Now I am going, however-alone-
and as I pass by, I'll tell the stableman not to let out the horses
if anybody should like to get away before the count comes home.
Good-bye! [Goes out.]

JEAN. Well, ain't she a devil!--And all this for the sake of a
finch!

JULIA. [Apathetically] Never mind the finch!--Can you see any way
out of this, any way to end it?

JEAN. [Ponders] No!

JULIA. What would you do in my place?

JEAN. In your place? Let me see. As one of gentle birth, as a
woman, as one who has--fallen. I don't know--yes, I do know!

JULIA. [Picking up the razor with a significant gesture] Like this?

JEAN. Yes!--But please observe that I myself wouldn't do it, for
there is a difference between us.

JULIA. Because you are a man and I a woman? What is the difference?

JEAN. It is the same--as--that between man and woman.

JULIA. [With the razor in her hand] I want to, but I cannot!--My
father couldn't either, that time he should have done it.

JEAN. No, he should not have done it, for he had to get his revenge
first.

JULIA. And now it is my mother's turn to revenge herself again,
through me.

JEAN. Have you not loved your father, Miss Julia?

JULIA. Yes, immensely, but I must have hated him, too. I think I
must have been doing so without being aware of it. But he was the
one who reared me in contempt for my own sex--half woman and half
man! Whose fault is it, this that has happened? My father's--my
mother's--my own? My own? Why, I have nothing that is my own. I
haven't a thought that didn't come from my father; not a passion
that didn't come from my mother; and now this last--this about all
human creatures being equal--I got that from him, my fiancé--whom I
call a scoundrel for that reason! How can it be my own fault? To
put the blame on Jesus, as Christine does--no, I am too proud for
that, and know too much--thanks to my father's teachings--And that
about a rich person not getting into heaven, it's just a lie, and
Christine, who has money in the savings-bank, wouldn't get in
anyhow. Whose is the fault?--What does it matter whose it is? For
just the same I am the one who must bear the guilt and the results--

JEAN. Yes, but--

[Two sharp strokes are rung on the bell. MISS JULIA leaps to her
feet. JEAN changes his coat.]

JEAN. The count is back. Think if Christine-- [Goes to the
speaking-tube, knocks on it, and listens.]

JULIA. Now he has been to the chiffonier!

JEAN. It is Jean, your lordship! [Listening again, the spectators
being unable to hear what the count says] Yes, your lordship!
[Listening] Yes, your lordship! At once! [Listening] In a minute,
your lordship! [Listening] Yes, yes! In half an hour!

JULIA. [With intense concern] What did he say? Lord Jesus, what did
he say?

JEAN. He called for his boots and wanted his coffee in half an
hour.

JULIA. In half an hour then! Oh, I am so tired. I can't do
anything; can't repent, can't run away, can't stay, can't live-
can't die! Help me now! Command me, and I'll obey you like a dog!
Do me this last favour--save my honour, and save his name! You know
what my will ought to do, and what it cannot do--now give me your
will, and make me do it!

JEAN. I don't know why--but now I can't either--I don't understand-
It is just as if this coat here made a--I cannot command you--and
now, since I've heard the count's voice--now--I can't quite explain
it-but--Oh, that damned menial is back in my spine again. I
believe if the count should come down here, and if he should tell
me to cut my own throat--I'd do it on the spot!

JULIA. Make believe that you are he, and that I am you! You did
some fine acting when you were on your knees before me--then you
were the nobleman--or--have you ever been to a show and seen one
who could hypnotize people?

[JEAN makes a sign of assent.]

JULIA. He says to his subject: get the broom. And the man gets it.
He says: sweep. And the man sweeps.

JEAN. But then the other person must be asleep.

JULIA. [Ecstatically] I am asleep already--there is nothing in the
whole room but a lot of smoke--and you look like a stove--that
looks like a man in black clothes and a high hat--and your eyes
glow like coals when the fire is going out--and your face is a lump
of white ashes. [The sunlight has reached the floor and is now
falling on JEAN] How warm and nice it is! [She rubs her hands as if
warming them before a fire.] And so light--and so peaceful!

JEAN. [Takes the razor and puts it in her hand] There's the broom!
Go now, while it is light--to the barn--and-- [Whispers something
in her ear.]

JULIA. [Awake] Thank you! Now I shall have rest! But tell me first-
that the foremost also receive the gift of grace. Say it, even if
you don't believe it.

JEAN. The foremost? No, I can't do that!--But wait--Miss Julia--I
know! You are no longer among the foremost--now when you are among
the--last!

JULIA. That's right. I am among the last of all: I am the very
last. Oh!--But now I cannot go--Tell me once more that I must go!

JEAN. No, now I can't do it either. I cannot!

JULIA. And those that are foremost shall be the last.

JEAN. Don't think, don't think! Why, you are taking away my
strength, too, so that I become a coward--What? I thought I saw the
bell moving!--To be that scared of a bell! Yes, but it isn't only
the bell--there is somebody behind it--a hand that makes it move-
and something else that makes the hand move-but if you cover up
your ears--just cover up your ears! Then it rings worse than ever!
Rings and rings, until you answer it--and then it's too late--then
comes the sheriff--and then--

[Two quick rings from the bell.]

JEAN. [Shrinks together; then he straightens himself up] It's
horrid! But there's no other end to it!--Go!

[JULIA goes firmly out through the door.]

(Curtain.)




THE STRONGER

INTRODUCTION

Of Strindberg's dramatic works the briefest is "The Stronger." He
called it a "scene." It is a mere incident--what is called a
"sketch" on our vaudeville stage, and what the French so aptly have
named a "quart d'heure." And one of the two figures in the cast
remains silent throughout the action, thus turning the little play
practically into a monologue. Yet it has all the dramatic intensity
which we have come to look upon as one of the main characteristics
of Strindberg's work for the stage. It is quivering with mental
conflict, and because of this conflict human destinies may be seen
to change while we are watching. Three life stories are laid bare
during the few minutes we are listening to the seemingly aimless,
yet so ominous, chatter of _Mrs. X._--and when she sallies forth at
last, triumphant in her sense of possession, we know as much about
her, her husband, and her rival, as if we had been reading a
three-volume novel about them.

Small as it is, the part of _Mrs. X._ would befit a "star," but an
actress of genius and discernment might prefer the dumb part of
_Miss Y_. One thing is certain: that the latter character has few
equals in its demand on the performer's tact and skill and
imagination. This wordless opponent of _Mrs. X._ is another of
those vampire characters which Strindberg was so fond of drawing,
and it is on her the limelight is directed with merciless
persistency.

"The Stronger" was first published in 1890, as part of the
collection of miscellaneous writings which their author named
"Things Printed and Unprinted." The present English version was
made by me some years ago--in the summer of 1906--when I first
began to plan a Strindberg edition for this country. At that time
it appeared in the literary supplement of the _New York Evening
Post_.



THE STRONGER
A SCENE
1890

PERSONS

MRS. X., an actress, married.
MISS Y., an actress, unmarried.


THE STRONGER

SCENE

[A corner of a ladies' restaurant; two small tables of cast-iron,
a sofa covered with red plush, and a few chairs.]

[MRS. X. enters dressed in hat and winter coat, and carrying a
pretty Japanese basket on her arm.]

[MISS Y. has in front of her a partly emptied bottle of beer; she is
reading an illustrated weekly, and every now and then she exchanges
it for a new one.]

MRS. X. Well, how do, Millie! Here you are sitting on Christmas Eve
as lonely as a poor bachelor.

[MISS Y. looks up from the paper for a moment, nods, and resumes
her reading.]

MRS. X. Really, I feel sorry to find you like this--alone--alone in
a restaurant, and on Christmas Eve of all times. It makes me as sad
as when I saw a wedding party at Paris once in a restaurant--the
bride was reading a comic paper and the groom was playing billiards
with the witnesses. Ugh, when it begins that way, I thought, how
will it end? Think of it, playing billiards on his wedding day!
Yes, and you're going to say that she was reading a comic paper--
that's a different case, my dear.

[A WAITRESS brings a cup of chocolate, places it before MRS. X.,
and disappears again.]

MRS. X. [Sips a few spoonfuls; opens the basket and displays a
number of Christmas presents] See what I've bought for my tots.
[Picks up a doll] What do you think of this? Lisa is to have it.
She can roll her eyes and twist her head, do you see? Fine, is it
not? And here's a cork pistol for Carl. [Loads the pistol and pops
it at Miss Y.]

[MISS Y. starts as if frightened.]

MRS. X. Did I scare you? Why, you didn't fear I was going to shoot
you, did you? Really, I didn't think you could believe that of me.
If you were to shoot _me_--well, that wouldn't surprise me the
least. I've got in your way once, and I know you'll never forget
it--but I couldn't help it. You still think I intrigued you away
from the Royal Theatre, and I didn't do anything of the kind--
although you think so. But it doesn't matter what I say, of course--
you believe it was I just the same. [Pulls out a pair of embroidered
slippers] Well, these are for my hubby-tulips--I've embroidered
them myself. Hm, I hate tulips--and he must have them on everything.

[MISS Y. looks up from the paper with an expression of mingled
sarcasm and curiosity.]

MRS. X. [Puts a hand in each slipper] Just see what small feet Bob
has. See? And you should see him walk--elegant! Of course, you've
never seen him in slippers.

[MISS Y. laughs aloud.]

MRS. X. Look here--here he comes. [Makes the slippers walk across
the table.]

[MISS Y. laughs again.]

MRS. X. Then he gets angry, and he stamps his foot just like this:
"Blame that cook who can't learn how to make coffee." Or: "The
idiot--now that girl has forgotten to fix my study lamp again."
Then there is a draught through the floor and his feet get cold:
"Gee, but it's freezing, and those blanked idiots don't even know
enough to keep the house warm." [She rubs the sole of one slipper
against the instep of the other.]

[MISS Y. breaks into prolonged laughter.]

MRS. X. And then he comes home and has to hunt for his slippers--
Mary has pushed them under the bureau. Well, perhaps it is not
right to be making fun of one's own husband. He's pretty good for
all that--a real dear little hubby, that's what he is. You should
have such a husband--what are you laughing at? Can't you tell?
Then, you see, I know he is faithful. Yes, I know, for he has told
me himself--what in the world makes you giggle like that? That
nasty Betty tried to get him away from me while I was on the road-
can you think of anything more infamous? [Pause] But I'd have
scratched the eyes out of her face, that's what I'd have done if I
had been at home when she tried it. [Pause] I'm glad Bob told me
all about it, so I didn't have to hear it first from somebody else.
[Pause] And just think of it, Betty was not the only one! I don't
know why it is, but all women seem to be crazy after my husband. It
must be because they imagine his government position gives him
something to say about the engagements. Perhaps you've tried it
yourself--you may have set your traps for him, too? Yes, I don't
trust you very far--but I know he never cared for you--and then I
have been thinking you rather had a grudge against him.

[Pause. They look at each other in an embarrassed manner.]

MRS. X. Amèlia, spend the evening with us, won't you? Just to show
that you are not angry--not with me, at least. I cannot tell
exactly why, but it seems so awfully unpleasant to have you--you
for an enemy. Perhaps because I got in your way that time
[rallentando] or--I don't know--really, I don't know at all--

[Pause. MISS Y. gazes searchingly at MRS. X.]

MRS. X. [Thoughtfully] It was so peculiar, the way our acquaintance--
why, I was afraid of you when I first met you; so afraid that I did
not dare to let you out of sight. It didn't matter where I tried to
go--I always found myself near you. I didn't have the courage to be
your enemy--and so I became your friend. But there was always
something discordant in the air when you called at our home, for I
saw that my husband didn't like you--and it annoyed me just as it
does when a dress won't fit. I tried my very best to make him
appear friendly to you at least, but I couldn't move him--not until
you were engaged. Then you two became such fast friends that it
almost looked as if you had not dared to show your real feelings
before, when it was not safe--and later--let me see, now! I didn't
get jealous--strange, was it not? And I remember the baptism--you
were acting as godmother, and I made him kiss you--and he did, but
both of you looked terribly embarrassed--that is, I didn't think of
it then--or afterwards, even--I never thought of it-till--_now_!
[Rises impulsively] Why don't you say something? You have not
uttered a single word all this time. You've just let me go on
talking. You've been sitting there staring at me only, and your
eyes have drawn out of me all these thoughts which were lying in me
like silk in a cocoon--thoughts--bad thoughts maybe--let me think.
Why did you break your engagement? Why have you never called on us
afterward? Why don't you want to be with us to-night?

[MISS Y. makes a motion as if intending to speak.]

MRS. X. No, you don't need to say anything at all. All is clear to
me now. So, that's the reason of it all. Yes, yes! Everything fits
together now. Shame on you! I don't want to sit at the same table
with you. [Moves her things to another table] That's why I must put
those hateful tulips on his slippers--because you love them.
[Throws the slippers on the floor] That's why we have to spend the
summer in the mountains--because you can't bear the salt smell of
the ocean; that's why my boy had to be called Eskil--because that
was your father's name; that's why I had to wear your colour, and
read your books, and eat your favourite dishes, and drink your
drinks--this chocolate, for instance; that's why--great heavens!--
it's terrible to think of it--it's terrible! Everything was forced
on me by you-even your passions. Your soul bored itself into mine
as a worm into an apple, and it ate and ate, and burrowed and
burrowed, till nothing was left but the outside shell and a little
black dust. I wanted to run away from you, but I couldn't. You were
always on hand like a snake with your black eyes to charm me--I
felt how my wings beat the air only to drag me down--I was in the
water, with my feet tied together, and the harder I worked with my
arms, the further down I went--down, down, till I sank to the
bottom, where you lay in wait like a monster crab to catch me with
your claws--and now I'm there! Shame on you! How I hate you, hate
you, hate you! But you, you just sit there, silent and calm and
indifferent, whether the moon is new or full; whether it's
Christmas or mid-summer; whether other people are happy or unhappy.
You are incapable of hatred, and you don't know how to love. As a
cat in front of a mouse-hole, you are sitting there!--you can't
drag your prey out, and you can't pursue it, but you can outwait
it. Here you sit in this corner--do you know they've nicknamed it
"the mouse-trap" on your account? Here you read the papers to see
if anybody is in trouble, or if anybody is about to be discharged
from the theatre. Here you watch your victims and calculate your
chances and take your tributes. Poor Amèlia! Do you know, I pity
you all the same, for I know you are unhappy--unhappy as one who
has been wounded, and malicious because you are wounded. I ought to
be angry with you, but really I can't--you are so small after all--
and as to Bob, why that does not bother me in the least. What does
it matter to me anyhow? If you or somebody else taught me to drink
chocolate--what of that? [Takes a spoonful of chocolate; then
sententiously] They say chocolate is very wholesome. And if I have
learned from you how to dress--_tant mieux_!--it has only given me
a stronger hold on my husband--and you have lost where I have
gained. Yes, judging by several signs, I think you have lost him
already. Of course, you meant me to break with him--as you did, and
as you are now regretting--but, you see, _I_ never would do that.
It won't do to be narrow-minded, you know. And why should I take
only what nobody else wants? Perhaps, after all, I am the stronger
now. You never got anything from me; you merely gave--and thus
happened to me what happened to the thief--I had what you missed
when you woke up. How explain in any other way that, in your hand,
everything proved worthless and useless? You were never able to
keep a man's love, in spite of your tulips and your passions--and I
could; you could never learn the art of living from the books--as I
learned it; you bore no little Eskil, although that was your
father's name. And why do you keep silent always and everywhere--
silent, ever silent? I used to think it was because you were so
strong; and maybe the simple truth was you never had anything to
say--because you were unable to-think! [Rises and picks up the
slippers] I'm going home now--I'll take the tulips with me-your
tulips. You couldn't learn anything from others; you couldn't bend
and so you broke like a dry stem--and I didn't. Thank you, Amèlia,
for all your instructions. I thank you that you have taught me how
to love my husband. Now I'm going home--to him! [Exit.]

(Curtain.)




CREDITORS

INTRODUCTION

This is one of the three plays which Strindberg placed at the head
of his dramatic production during the middle ultra-naturalistic
period, the other two being "The Father" and "Miss Julia." It is,
in many ways, one of the strongest he ever produced. Its rarely
excelled unity of construction, its tremendous dramatic tension,
and its wonderful psychological analysis combine to make it a
masterpiece.

In Swedish its name is "Fordringsägare." This indefinite form may
be either singular or plural, but it is rarely used except as a
plural. And the play itself makes it perfectly clear that the
proper translation of its title is "Creditors," for under this
aspect appear both the former and the present husband of _Tekla_.
One of the main objects of the play is to reveal her indebtedness
first to one and then to the other of these men, while all the
time she is posing as a person of original gifts.

I have little doubt that Strindberg, at the time he wrote this
play--and bear in mind that this happened only a year before he
finally decided to free himself from an impossible marriage by an
appeal to the law--believed _Tekla_ to be fairly representative of
womanhood in general. The utter unreasonableness of such a view
need hardly be pointed out, and I shall waste no time on it. A
question more worthy of discussion is whether the figure of _Tekla_
be true to life merely as the picture of a personality--as one out
of numerous imaginable variations on a type decided not by sex but
by faculties and qualities. And the same question may well be
raised in regard to the two men, both of whom are evidently
intended to win our sympathy: one as the victim of a fate stronger
than himself, and the other as the conqueror of adverse and
humiliating circumstances.

Personally, I am inclined to doubt whether a _Tekla_ can be found
in the flesh--and even if found, she might seem too exceptional to
gain acceptance as a real individuality. It must be remembered,
however, that, in spite of his avowed realism, Strindberg did not
draw his men and women in the spirit generally designated as
impressionistic; that is, with the idea that they might step
straight from his pages into life and there win recognition as
human beings of familiar aspect. His realism is always mixed with
idealism; his figures are always "doctored," so to speak. And they
have been thus treated in order to enable their creator to drive
home the particular truth he is just then concerned with.

Consciously or unconsciously he sought to produce what may be
designated as "pure cultures" of certain human qualities. But
these he took great pains to arrange in their proper psychological
settings, for mental and moral qualities, like everything else,
run in groups that are more or less harmonious, if not exactly
homogeneous. The man with a single quality, like Molière's
_Harpagon_, was much too primitive and crude for Strindberg's art,
as he himself rightly asserted in his preface to "Miss Julia."
When he wanted to draw the genius of greed, so to speak, he did it
by setting it in the midst of related qualities of a kind most
likely to be attracted by it.

_Tekla_ is such a "pure culture" of a group of naturally correlated
mental and moral qualities and functions and tendencies--of a
personality built up logically around a dominant central note.
There are within all of us many personalities, some of which
remain for ever potentialities. But it is conceivable that any one
of them, under circumstances different from those in which we have
been living, might have developed into its severely logical
consequence--or, if you please, into a human being that would be
held abnormal if actually encountered.

This is exactly what Strindberg seems to have done time and again,
both in his middle and final periods, in his novels as well as in
his plays. In all of us a _Tekla_, an _Adolph_, a _Gustav_--or a
_Jean_ and a _Miss Julia_--lie more or less dormant. And if we search
our souls unsparingly, I fear the result can only be an admission
that--had the needed set of circumstances been provided--we might
have come unpleasantly close to one of those Strindbergian
creatures which we are now inclined to reject as unhuman.

Here we have the secret of what I believe to be the great Swedish
dramatist's strongest hold on our interest. How could it otherwise
happen that so many critics, of such widely differing temperaments,
have recorded identical feelings as springing from a study of his
work: on one side an active resentment, a keen unwillingness to
be interested; on the other, an attraction that would not be denied
in spite of resolute resistance to it! For Strindberg _does_ hold
us, even when we regret his power of doing so. And no one familiar
with the conclusions of modern psychology could imagine such a
paradox possible did not the object of our sorely divided feelings
provide us with something that our minds instinctively recognise as
true to life in some way, and for that reason valuable to the art of
living.

There are so many ways of presenting truth. Strindberg's is only
one of them--and not the one commonly employed nowadays. Its main
fault lies perhaps in being too intellectual, too abstract. For
while Strindberg was intensely emotional, and while this fact
colours all his writings, he could only express himself through
his reason. An emotion that would move another man to murder would
precipitate Strindberg into merciless analysis of his own or
somebody else's mental and moral make-up. At any rate, I do not
proclaim his way of presenting truth as the best one of all
available. But I suspect that this decidedly strange way of
Strindberg's--resulting in such repulsively superior beings as
_Gustav_, or in such grievously inferior ones as _Adolph_--may come
nearer the temper and needs of the future than do the ways of much
more plausible writers. This does not need to imply that the
future will imitate Strindberg. But it may ascertain what he aimed
at doing, and then do it with a degree of perfection which he, the
pioneer, could never hope to attain.




CREDITORS
A TRAGICOMEDY
1889


PERSONS

TEKLA
ADOLPH, her husband, a painter
GUSTAV, her divorced husband, a high-school teacher (who is
travelling under an assumed name)


SCENE

(A parlor in a summer hotel on the sea-shore. The rear wall has a
door opening on a veranda, beyond which is seen a landscape. To
the right of the door stands a table with newspapers on it. There
is a chair on the left side of the stage. To the right of the
table stands a sofa. A door on the right leads to an adjoining
room.)


(ADOLPH and GUSTAV, the latter seated on the sofa by the table to
the right.)

ADOLPH. [At work on a wax figure on a miniature modelling stand;
his crutches are placed beside him]--and for all this I have to
thank you!

GUSTAV. [Smoking a cigar] Oh, nonsense!

ADOLPH. Why, certainly! During the first days after my wife had
gone, I lay helpless on a sofa and did nothing but long for her.
It was as if she had taken away my crutches with her, so that I
couldn't move from the spot. When I had slept a couple of days, I
seemed to come to, and began to pull myself together. My head
calmed down after having been working feverishly. Old thoughts
from days gone by bobbed up again. The desire to work and the
instinct for creation came back. My eyes recovered their faculty
of quick and straight vision--and then you showed up.

GUSTAV. I admit you were in a miserable condition when I first met
you, and you had to use your crutches when you walked, but this is
not to say that my presence has been the cause of your recovery.
You needed a rest, and you had a craving for masculine company.

ADOLPH. Oh, that's true enough, like everything you say. Once I
used to have men for friends, but I thought them superfluous after
I married, and I felt quite satisfied with the one I had chosen.
Later I was drawn into new circles and made a lot of acquaintances,
but my wife was jealous of them--she wanted to keep me to herself:
worse still--she wanted also to keep my friends to herself. And so
I was left alone with my own jealousy.

GUSTAV. Yes, you have a strong tendency toward that kind of
disease.

ADOLPH. I was afraid of losing her--and I tried to prevent it.
There is nothing strange in that. But I was never afraid that she
might be deceiving me--

GUSTAV. No, that's what married men are never afraid of.

ADOLPH. Yes, isn't it queer? What I really feared was that her
friends would get such an influence over her that they would begin
to exercise some kind of indirect power over me--and _that_ is
something I couldn't bear.

GUSTAV. So your ideas don't agree--yours and your wife's?

ADOLPH. Seeing that you have heard so much already, I may as well
tell you everything. My wife has an independent nature--what are
you smiling at?

GUSTAV. Go on! She has an independent nature--

ADOLPH. Which cannot accept anything from me--

GUSTAV. But from everybody else.

ADOLPH. [After a pause] Yes.--And it looked as if she especially
hated my ideas because they were mine, and not because there was
anything wrong about them. For it used to happen quite often that
she advanced ideas that had once been mine, and that she stood up
for them as her own. Yes, it even happened that friends of mine
gave her ideas which they had taken directly from me, and then
they seemed all right. Everything was all right except what came
from me.

GUSTAV. Which means that you are not entirely happy?

ADOLPH. Oh yes, I am happy. I have the one I wanted, and I have
never wanted anybody else.

GUSTAV. And you have never wanted to be free?

ADOLPH. No, I can't say that I have. Oh, well, sometimes I have
imagined that it might seem like a rest to be free. But the moment
she leaves me, I begin to long for her--long for her as for my own
arms and legs. It is queer that sometimes I have a feeling that
she is nothing in herself, but only a part of myself--an organ
that can take away with it my will, my very desire to live. It
seems almost as if I had deposited with her that centre of
vitality of which the anatomical books tell us.

GUSTAV. Perhaps, when we get to the bottom of it, that is just
what has happened.

ADOLPH. How could it be so? Is she not an independent being, with
thoughts of her own? And when I met her I was nothing--a child of
an artist whom she undertook to educate.

GUSTAV. But later you developed her thoughts and educated her,
didn't you?

ADOLPH. No, she stopped growing and I pushed on.

GUSTAV. Yes, isn't it strange that her "authoring" seemed to fall
off after her first book--or that it failed to improve, at least?
But that first time she had a subject which wrote itself--for I
understand she used her former husband for a model. You never knew
him, did you? They say he was an idiot.

ADOLPH. I never knew him, as he was away for six months at a time.
But he must have been an arch-idiot, judging by her picture of
him. [Pause] And you may feel sure that the picture was correct.

GUSTAV. I do!--But why did she ever take him?

ADOLPH. Because she didn't know him well enough. Of course, you
never _do_ get acquainted until afterward!

GUSTAV. And for that reason one ought not to marry until--
afterward.--And he was a tyrant, of course?

ADOLPH. Of course?

GUSTAV. Why, so are all married men. [Feeling his way] And you not
the least.

ADOLPH. I? Who let my wife come and go as she pleases--

GUSTAV. Well, that's nothing. You couldn't lock her up, could you?
But do you like her to stay away whole nights?

ADOLPH. No, really, I don't.

GUSTAV. There, you see! [With a change of tactics] And to tell the
truth, it would only make you ridiculous to like it.

ADOLPH. Ridiculous? Can a man be ridiculous because he trusts his
wife?

GUSTAV. Of course he can. And it's just what you are already--and
thoroughly at that!

ADOLPH. [Convulsively] I! It's what I dread most of all--and
there's going to be a change.

GUSTAV. Don't get excited now--or you'll have another attack.

ADOLPH. But why isn't she ridiculous when I stay out all night?

GUSTAV. Yes, why? Well, it's nothing that concerns you, but that's
the way it is. And while you are trying to figure out why, the
mishap has already occurred.

ADOLPH. What mishap?

GUSTAV. However, the first husband was a tyrant, and she took him
only to get her freedom. You see, a girl cannot have freedom
except by providing herself with a chaperon--or what we call a
husband.

ADOLPH. Of course not.

GUSTAV. And now you are the chaperon.

ADOLPH. I?

GUSTAV. Since you are her husband.

(ADOLPH keeps a preoccupied silence.)

GUSTAV. Am I not right?

ADOLPH. [Uneasily] I don't know. You live with a woman for years,
and you never stop to analyse her, or your relationship with her,
and then--then you begin to think--and there you are!--Gustav, you
are my friend. The only male friend I have. During this last week
you have given me courage to live again. It is as if your own
magnetism had been poured into me. Like a watchmaker, you have
fixed the works in my head and wound up the spring again. Can't
you hear, yourself, how I think more clearly and speak more to the
point? And to myself at least it seems as if my voice had
recovered its ring.

GUSTAV. So it seems to me also. And why is that?

ADOLPH. I shouldn't wonder if you grew accustomed to lower your
voice in talking to women. I know at least that Tekla always used
to accuse me of shouting.

GUSTAV. And so you toned down your voice and accepted the rule of
the slipper?

ADOLPH. That isn't quite the way to put it. [After some
reflection] I think it is even worse than that. But let us talk of
something else!--What was I saying?--Yes, you came here, and you
enabled me to see my art in its true light. Of course, for some
time I had noticed my growing lack of interest in painting, as it
didn't seem to offer me the proper medium for the expression of
what I wanted to bring out. But when you explained all this to me,
and made it clear why painting must fail as a timely outlet for
the creative instinct, then I saw the light at last--and I
realised that hereafter it would not be possible for me to express
myself by means of colour only.

GUSTAV. Are you quite sure now that you cannot go on painting--
that you may not have a relapse?

ADOLPH. Perfectly sure! For I have tested myself. When I went to
bed that night after our talk, I rehearsed your argument point by
point, and I knew you had it right. But when I woke up from a good
night's sleep and my head was clear again, then it came over me in
a flash that you might be mistaken after all. And I jumped out of
bed and got hold of my brushes and paints--but it was no use!
Every trace of illusion was gone--it was nothing but smears of
paint, and I quaked at the thought of having believed, and having
made others believe, that a painted canvas could be anything but a
painted canvas. The veil had fallen from my eyes, and it was just
as impossible for me to paint any more as it was to become a child
again.

GUSTAV. And then you saw that the realistic tendency of our day,
its craving for actuality and tangibility, could only find its
proper form in sculpture, which gives you body, extension in all
three dimensions--

ADOLPH. [Vaguely] The three dimensions--oh yes, body, in a word!

GUSTAV. And then you became a sculptor yourself. Or rather, you
have been one all your life, but you had gone astray, and nothing
was needed but a guide to put you on the right road--Tell me, do
you experience supreme joy now when you are at work?

ADOLPH. Now I am living!

GUSTAV. May I see what you are doing?

ADOLPH. A female figure.

GUSTAV. Without a model? And so lifelike at that!

ADOLPH. [Apathetically] Yes, but it resembles somebody. It is
remarkable that this woman seems to have become a part of my body
as I of hers.

GUSTAV. Well, that's not so very remarkable. Do you know what
transfusion is?

ADOLPH. Of blood? Yes.

GUSTAV. And you seem to have bled yourself a little too much. When
I look at the figure here I comprehend several things which I
merely guessed before. You have loved her tremendously!

ADOLPH. Yes, to such an extent that I couldn't tell whether she
was I or I she. When she is smiling, I smile also. When she is
weeping, I weep. And when she--can you imagine anything like it?--
when she was giving life to our child--I felt the birth pangs
within myself.

GUSTAV. Do you know, my dear friend--I hate to speak of it, but
you are already showing the first symptoms of epilepsy.

ADOLPH. [Agitated] I! How can you tell?

GUSTAV. Because I have watched the symptoms in a younger brother
of mine who had been worshipping Venus a little too excessively.

ADOLPH. How--how did it show itself--that thing you spoke of?

[During the following passage GUSTAV speaks with great animation,
and ADOLPH listens so intently that, unconsciously, he imitates
many of GUSTAV'S gestures.]

GUSTAV. It was dreadful to witness, and if you don't feel strong
enough I won't inflict a description of it on you.

ADOLPH. [Nervously] Yes, go right on--just go on!

GUSTAV. Well, the boy happened to marry an innocent little
creature with curls, and eyes like a turtle-dove; with the face of
a child and the pure soul of an angel. But nevertheless she
managed to usurp the male prerogative--

ADOLPH. What is that?

GUSTAV. Initiative, of course. And with the result that the angel
nearly carried him off to heaven. But first he had to be put on
the cross and made to feel the nails in his flesh. It was
horrible!

ADOLPH. [Breathlessly] Well, what happened?

GUSTAV. [Lingering on each word] We might be sitting together
talking, he and I--and when I had been speaking for a while his
face would turn white as chalk, his arms and legs would grow
stiff, and his thumbs became twisted against the palms of his
hands--like this. [He illustrates the movement and it is imitated
by ADOLPH] Then his eyes became bloodshot, and he began to chew--
like this. [He chews, and again ADOLPH imitates him] The saliva
was rattling in his throat. His chest was squeezed together as if
it had been closed in a vice. The pupils of his eyes flickered
like gas-jets. His tongue beat the saliva into a lather, and he
sank--slowly--down--backward--into the chair--as if he were
drowning. And then--

ADOLPH. [In a whisper] Stop now!

GUSTAV. And then--Are you not feeling well?

ADOLPH. No.

GUSTAV. [Gets a glass of water for him] There: drink now. And
we'll talk of something else.

ADOLPH. [Feebly] Thank you! Please go on!

GUSTAV. Well--when he came to he couldn't remember anything at
all. He had simply lost consciousness. Has that ever happened to
you?

ADOLPH. Yes, I have had attacks of vertigo now and then, but my
physician says it's only anaemia.

GUSTAV. Well, that's the beginning of it, you know. But, believe
me, it will end in epilepsy if you don't take care of yourself.

ADOLPH. What can I do?

GUSTAV. To begin with, you will have to observe complete
abstinence.

ADOLPH. For how long?

GUSTAV. For half a year at least.

ADOLPH. I cannot do it. That would upset our married life.

GUSTAV. Good-bye to you then!

ADOLPH. [Covers up the wax figure] I cannot do it!

GUSTAV. Can you not save your own life?--But tell me, as you have
already given me so much of your confidence--is there no other
canker, no secret wound, that troubles you? For it is very rare to
find only one cause of discord, as life is so full of variety and
so fruitful in chances for false relationships. Is there not a
corpse in your cargo that you are trying to hide from yourself?--
For instance, you said a minute ago that you have a child which
has been left in other people's care. Why don't you keep it with
you?

ADOLPH. My wife doesn't want us to do so.

GUSTAV. And her reason? Speak up now!

ADOLPH. Because, when it was about three years old, it began to
look like him, her former husband.

GUSTAV. Well? Have you seen her former husband?

ADOLPH. No, never. I have only had a casual glance at a very poor
portrait of him, and then I couldn't detect the slightest
resemblance.

GUSTAV. Oh, portraits are never like the original, and, besides,
he might have changed considerably since it was made. However, I
hope it hasn't aroused any suspicions in you?

ADOLPH. Not at all. The child was born a year after our marriage,
and the husband was abroad when I first met Tekla--it happened
right here, in this very house even, and that's why we come here
every summer.

GUSTAV. No, then there can be no cause for suspicion. And you
wouldn't have had any reason to trouble yourself anyhow, for the
children of a widow who marries again often show a likeness to her
dead husband. It is annoying, of course, and that's why they used
to burn all widows in India, as you know.--But tell me: have you
ever felt jealous of him--of his memory? Would it not sicken you
to meet him on a walk and hear him, with his eyes on your Tekla,
use the word "we" instead of "I"?--We!

ADOLPH. I cannot deny that I have been pursued by that very
thought.

GUSTAV. There now!--And you'll never get rid of it. There are
discords in this life which can never be reduced to harmony. For
this reason you had better put wax in your ears and go to work. If
you work, and grow old, and pile masses of new impressions on the
hatches, then the corpse will stay quiet in the hold.

ADOLPH. Pardon me for interrupting you, but--it is wonderful how
you resemble Tekla now and then while you are talking. You have a
way of blinking one eye as if you were taking aim with a gun, and
your eyes have the same influence on me as hers have at times.

GUSTAV. No, really?

ADOLPH. And now you said that "no, really" in the same indifferent
way that she does. She also has the habit of saying "no, really"
quite often.

GUSTAV. Perhaps we are distantly related, seeing that all human
beings are said to be of one family. At any rate, it will be
interesting to make your wife's acquaintance to see if what you
say is true.

ADOLPH. And do you know, she never takes an expression from me.
She seems rather to avoid my vocabulary, and I have never caught
her using any of my gestures. And yet people as a rule develop
what is called "marital resemblance."

GUSTAV. And do you know why this has not happened in your case?--
That woman has never loved you.

ADOLPH. What do you mean?

GUSTAV. I hope you will excuse what I am saying--but woman's love
consists in taking, in receiving, and one from whom she takes
nothing does not have her love. She has never loved you!

ADOLPH. Don't you think her capable of loving more than once?

GUSTAV. No, for we cannot be deceived more than once. Then our
eyes are opened once for all. You have never been deceived, and so
you had better beware of those that have. They are dangerous, I
tell you.

ADOLPH. Your words pierce me like knife thrusts, and I fool as if
something were being severed within me, but I cannot help it. And
this cutting brings a certain relief, too. For it means the
pricking of ulcers that never seemed to ripen.--She has never
loved me!--Why, then, did she ever take me?

GUSTAV. Tell me first how she came to take you, and whether it was
you who took her or she who took you?

ADOLPH. Heaven only knows if I can tell at all!--How did it
happen? Well, it didn't come about in one day.

GUSTAV. Would you like to have me tell you how it did happen?

ADOLPH. That's more than you can do.

GUSTAV. Oh, by using the information about yourself and your wife
that you have given me, I think I can reconstruct the whole event.
Listen now, and you'll hear. [In a dispassionate tone, almost
humorously] The husband had gone abroad to study, and she was
alone. At first her freedom seemed rather pleasant. Then came a
sense of vacancy, for I presume she was pretty empty when she had
lived by herself for a fortnight. Then _he_ appeared, and by and by
the vacancy was filled up. By comparison the absent one seemed to
fade out, and for the simple reason that he was at a distance--you
know the law about the square of the distance? But when they felt
their passions stirring, then came fear--of themselves, of their
consciences, of him. For protection they played brother and
sister. And the more their feelings smacked of the flesh, the more
they tried to make their relationship appear spiritual.

ADOLPH. Brother and sister? How could you know that?

GUSTAV. I guessed it. Children are in the habit of playing papa
and mamma, but when they grow up they play brother and sister--in
order to hide what should be hidden!--And then they took the vow
of chastity--and then they played hide-and-seek--until they got
in a dark corner where they were sure of not being seen by
anybody. [With mock severity] But they felt that there was _one_
whose eye reached them in the darkness--and they grew frightened--
and their fright raised the spectre of the absent one--his figure
began to assume immense proportions--it became metamorphosed:
turned into a nightmare that disturbed their amorous slumbers; a
creditor who knocked at all doors. Then they saw his black hand
between their own as these sneaked toward each other across the
table; and they heard his grating voice through that stillness of
the night that should have been broken only by the beating of
their own pulses. He did not prevent them from possessing each
other but he spoiled their happiness. And when they became aware
of his invisible interference with their happiness; when they took
flight at last--a vain flight from the memories that pursued them,
from the liability they had left behind, from the public opinion
they could not face--and when they found themselves without the
strength needed to carry their own guilt, then they had to send
out into the fields for a scapegoat to be sacrificed. They were
free-thinkers, but they did not have the courage to step forward
and speak openly to him the words: "We love each other!" To sum it
up, they were cowards, and so the tyrant had to be slaughtered. Is
that right?

ADOLPH. Yes, but you forget that she educated me, that she filled
my head with new thoughts--

GUSTAV. I have not forgotten it. But tell me: why could she not
educate the other man also--into a free-thinker?

ADOLPH. Oh, he was an idiot!

GUSTAV. Oh, of course--he was an idiot! But that's rather an
ambiguous term, and, as pictured in her novel, his idiocy seems
mainly to have consisted in failure to understand her. Pardon me a
question: but is your wife so very profound after all? I have
discovered nothing profound in her writings.

ADOLPH. Neither have I.--But then I have also to confess a certain
difficulty in understanding her. It is as if the cogs of our brain
wheels didn't fit into each other, and as if something went to
pieces in my head when I try to comprehend her.

GUSTAV. Maybe you are an idiot, too?

ADOLPH. I don't _think_ so! And it seems to me all the time as if
she were in the wrong--Would you care to read this letter, for
instance, which I got today?

[Takes out a letter from his pocket-book.]

GUSTAV. [Glancing through the letter] Hm! The handwriting seems
strangely familiar.

ADOLPH. Rather masculine, don't you think?

GUSTAV. Well, I know at least _one_ man who writes that kind of
hand--She addresses you as "brother." Are you still playing
comedy to each other? And do you never permit yourselves any
greater familiarity in speaking to each other?

ADOLPH. No, it seems to me that all mutual respect is lost in that
way.

GUSTAV. And is it to make you respect her that she calls herself
your sister?

ADOLPH. I want to respect her more than myself. I want her to be
the better part of my own self.

GUSTAV. Why don't you be that better part yourself? Would it be
less convenient than to permit somebody else to fill the part? Do
you want to place yourself beneath your wife?

ADOLPH. Yes, I do. I take a pleasure in never quite reaching up to
her. I have taught her to swim, for example, and now I enjoy
hearing her boast that she surpasses me both in skill and daring.
To begin with, I merely pretended to be awkward and timid in order
to raise her courage. And so it ended with my actually being her
inferior, more of a coward than she. It almost seemed to me as if
she had actually taken my courage away from me.

GUSTAV. Have you taught her anything else?

ADOLPH. Yes--but it must stay between us--I have taught her how to
spell, which she didn't know before. But now, listen: when she
took charge of our domestic correspondence, I grew out of the
habit of writing. And think of it: as the years passed on, lack of
practice made me forget a little here and there of my grammar. But
do you think she recalls that I was the one who taught her at the
start? No--and so I am "the idiot," of course.

GUSTAV. So you _are_ an idiot already?

ADOLPH. Oh, it's just a joke, of course!

GUSTAV. Of course! But this is clear cannibalism, I think. Do you
know what's behind that sort of practice? The savages eat their
enemies in order to acquire their useful qualities. And this woman
has been eating your soul, your courage, your knowledge--

ADOLPH. And my faith! It was I who urged her to write her first
book--

GUSTAV. [Making a face] Oh-h-h!

ADOLPH. It was I who praised her, even when I found her stuff
rather poor. It was I who brought her into literary circles where
she could gather honey from our most ornamental literary flowers.
It was I who used my personal influence to keep the critics from
her throat. It was I who blew her faith in herself into flame;
blew on it until I lost my own breath. I gave, gave, gave--until I
had nothing left for myself. Do you know--I'll tell you everything
now--do you know I really believe--and the human soul is so
peculiarly constituted--I believe that when my artistic successes
seemed about to put her in the shadow--as well as her reputation--
then I tried to put courage into her by belittling myself, and by
making my own art seem inferior to hers. I talked so long about
the insignificant part played by painting on the whole--talked so
long about it, and invented so many reasons to prove what I said,
that one fine day I found myself convinced of its futility. So all
you had to do was to breathe on a house of cards.

GUSTAV. Pardon me for recalling what you said at the beginning of
our talk--that she had never taken anything from you.

ADOLPH. She doesn't nowadays. Because there is nothing more to
take.

GUSTAV. The snake being full, it vomits now.

ADOLPH. Perhaps she has been taking a good deal more from me than
I have been aware of?

GUSTAV. You can be sure of that. She took when you were not
looking, and that is called theft.

ADOLPH. Perhaps she never did educate me?

GUSTAV. But you her? In all likelihood! But it was her trick to
make it appear the other way to you. May I ask how she set about
educating you?

ADOLPH. Oh, first of all--hm!

GUSTAV. Well?

ADOLPH. Well, I--

GUSTAV. No, we were speaking of her.

ADOLPH. Really, I cannot tell now.

GUSTAV. Do you see!

ADOLPH. However--she devoured my faith also, and so I sank further
and further down, until you came along and gave me a new faith.

GUSTAV. [Smiling] In sculpture?

ADOLPH. [Doubtfully] Yes.

GUSTAV. And have you really faith in it? In this abstract,
antiquated art that dates back to the childhood of civilisation?
Do you believe that you can obtain your effect by pure form--by
the three dimensions--tell me? That you can reach the practical
mind of our own day, and convey an illusion to it, without the use
of colour--without colour, mind you--do you really believe that?

ADOLPH. [Crushed] No!

GUSTAV. Well, I don't either.

ADOLPH. Why, then, did you say you did?

GUSTAV. Because I pitied you.

ADOLPH. Yes, I am to be pitied! For now I am bankrupt! Finished!--
And worst of all: not even she is left to me!

GUSTAV. Well, what could you do with her?

ADOLPH. Oh, she would be to me what God was before I became an
atheist: an object that might help me to exercise my sense of
veneration.

GUSTAV. Bury your sense of veneration and let something else grow
on top of it. A little wholesome scorn, for instance.

ADOLPH. I cannot live without having something to respect--

GUSTAV. Slave!

ADOLPH.--without a woman to respect and worship!

GUSTAV. Oh, HELL! Then you had better take back your God--if you
needs must have something to kow-tow to! You're a fine atheist,
with all that superstition about woman still in you! You're a fine
free-thinker, who dare not think freely about the dear ladies! Do
you know what that incomprehensible, sphinx-like, profound
something in your wife really is? It is sheer stupidity!--Look
here: she cannot even distinguish between th and t. And that, you
know, means there is something wrong with the mechanism. When you
look at the case, it looks like a chronometer, but the works
inside are those of an ordinary cheap watch.--Nothing but the
skirts-that's all! Put trousers on her, give her a pair of
moustaches of soot under her nose, then take a good, sober look at
her, and listen to her in the same manner: you'll find the
instrument has another sound to it. A phonograph, and nothing
else--giving yon back your own words, or those of other people--
and always in diluted form. Have you ever looked at a naked woman--
oh yes, yes, of course! A youth with over-developed breasts; an
under-developed man; a child that has shot up to full height and
then stopped growing in other respects; one who is chronically
anaemic: what can you expect of such a creature?

ADOLPH. Supposing all that to be true--how can it be possible that
I still think her my equal?

GUSTAV. Hallucination--the hypnotising power of skirts! Or--the
two of you may actually have become equals. The levelling process
has been finished. Her capillarity has brought the water in both
tubes to the same height.--Tell me [taking out his watch]: our
talk has now lasted six hours, and your wife ought soon to be
here. Don't you think we had better stop, so that you can get a
rest?

ADOLPH. No, don't leave me! I don't dare to be alone!

GUSTAV. Oh, for a little while only--and then the lady will come.

ADOLPH. Yes, she is coming!--It's all so queer! I long for her,
but I am afraid of her. She pets me, she is tender to me, but
there is suffocation in her kisses--something that pulls and
numbs. And I feel like a circus child that is being pinched by the
clown in order that it may look rosy-cheeked when it appears
before the public.

GUSTAV. I feel very sorry for you, my friend. Without being a
physician, I can tell that you are a dying man. It is enough to
look at your latest pictures in order to see that.

ADOLPH. You think so? How can you see it?

GUSTAV. Your colour is watery blue, anaemic, thin, so that the
cadaverous yellow of the canvas shines through. And it impresses
me as if your own hollow, putty-coloured checks were showing
beneath--

ADOLPH. Oh, stop, stop!

GUSTAV. Well, this is not only my personal opinion. Have you read
to-day's paper?

ADOLPH. [Shrinking] No!

GUSTAV. It's on the table here.

ADOLPH. [Reaching for the paper without daring to take hold of it]
Do they speak of it there?

GUSTAV. Read it--or do you want me to read it to you?

ADOLPH. No!

GUSTAV. I'll leave you, if you want me to.

ADOLPH. No, no, no!--I don't know--it seems as if I were beginning
to hate you, and yet I cannot let you go.--You drag me out of the
hole into which I have fallen, but no sooner do you get me on firm
ice, than you knock me on the head and shove me into the water
again. As long as my secrets were my own, I had still something
left within me, but now I am quite empty. There is a canvas by an
Italian master, showing a scene of torture--a saint whose
intestines are being torn out of him and rolled on the axle of a
windlass. The martyr is watching himself grow thinner and thinner,
while the roll on the axle grows thicker.--Now it seems to me as
if you had swelled out since you began to dig in me; and when you
leave, you'll carry away my vitals with you, and leave nothing but
an empty shell behind.

GUSTAV. How you do let your fancy run away with you!--And
besides, your wife is bringing back your heart.

ADOLPH. No, not since you have burned her to ashes. Everything is
in ashes where you have passed along: my art, my love, my hope, my
faith!

GUSTAV. All of it was pretty nearly finished before I came along.

ADOLPH. Yes, but it might have been saved. Now it's too late--
incendiary!

GUSTAV. We have cleared some ground only. Now we'll sow in the
ashes.

ADOLPH. I hate you! I curse you!

GUSTAV. Good symptoms! There is still some strength left in you.
And now I'll pull you up on the ice again. Listen now! Do you want
to listen to me, and do you want to obey me?

ADOLPH. Do with me what you will--I'll obey you!

GUSTAV. [Rising] Look at me!

ADOLPH. [Looking at GUSTAV] Now you are looking at me again with
that other pair of eyes which attracts me.

GUSTAV. And listen to me!

ADOLPH. Yes, but speak of yourself. Don't talk of me any longer: I
am like an open wound and cannot bear being touched.

GUSTAV. No, there is nothing to say about me. I am a teacher of
dead languages, and a widower--that's all! Take my hand.

ADOLPH. What terrible power there must be in you! It feels as if I
were touching an electrical generator.

GUSTAV. And bear in mind that I have been as weak as you are now.--
Stand up!

ADOLPH. [Rises, but keeps himself from falling only by throwing
his arms around the neck of GUSTAV] I am like a boneless baby, and
my brain seems to lie bare.

GUSTAV. Take a turn across the floor!

ADOLPH. I cannot!

GUSTAV. Do what I say, or I'll strike you!

ADOLPH. [Straightening himself up] What are you saying?

GUSTAV. I'll strike you, I said.

ADOLPH. [Leaping backward in a rage] You!

GUSTAV. That's it! Now you have got the blood into your head, and
your self-assurance is awake. And now I'll give you some
electriticy: where is your wife?

ADOLPH. Where is she?

GUSTAV. Yes.

ADOLPH. She is--at--a meeting.

GUSTAV. Sure?

ADOLPH. Absolutely!

GUSTAV. What kind of meeting?

ADOLPH. Oh, something relating to an orphan asylum.

GUSTAV. Did you part as friends?

ADOLPH. [With some hesitation] Not as friends.

GUSTAV. As enemies then!--What did you say that provoked her?

ADOLPH. You are terrible. I am afraid of you. How could you know?

GUSTAV. It's very simple: I possess three known factors, and with
their help I figure out the unknown one. What did you say to her?

ADOLPH. I said--two words only, but they were dreadful, and I
regret them--regret them very much.

GUSTAV. Don't do it! Tell me now?

ADOLPH. I said: "Old flirt!"

GUSTAV. What more did you say?

ADOLPH. Nothing at all.

GUSTAV. Yes, you did, but you have forgotten it--perhaps because
you don't dare remember it. You have put it away in a secret
drawer, but you have got to open it now!

ADOLPH. I can't remember!

GUSTAV. But I know. This is what you said: "You ought to be
ashamed of flirting when you are too old to have any more lovers!"

ADOLPH. Did I say that? I must have said it!--But how can you know
that I did?

GUSTAV. I heard her tell the story on board the boat as I came
here.

ADOLPH. To whom?

GUSTAV. To four young men who formed her company. She is already
developing a taste for chaste young men, just like--

ADOLPH. But there is nothing wrong in that?

GUSTAV. No more than in playing brother and sister when you are
papa and mamma.

ADOLPH. So you have seen her then?

GUSTAV. Yes, I have. But you have never seen her when you didn't--
I mean, when you were not present. And there's the reason, you
see, why a husband can never really know his wife. Have you a
portrait of her?

(Adolph takes a photograph from his pocketbook. There is a look of
aroused curiosity on his face.)

GUSTAV. You were not present when this was taken?

ADOLPH. No.

GUSTAV. Look at it. Does it bear much resemblance to the portrait
you painted of her? Hardly any! The features are the same, but the
expression is quite different. But you don't see this, because
your own picture of her creeps in between your eyes and this one.
Look at it now as a painter, without giving a thought to the
original. What does it represent? Nothing, so far as I can see,
but an affected coquette inviting somebody to come and play with
her. Do you notice this cynical line around the mouth which you
are never allowed to see? Can you see that her eyes are seeking
out some man who is not you? Do you observe that her dress is cut
low at the neck, that her hair is done up in a different way, that
her sleeve has managed to slip back from her arm? Can you see?

ADOLPH. Yes--now I see.

GUSTAV. Look out, my boy!

ADOLPH. For what?

GUSTAV. For her revenge! Bear in mind that when you said she could
not attract a man, you struck at what to her is most sacred--the
one thing above all others. If you had told her that she wrote
nothing but nonsense, she would have laughed at your poor taste.
But as it is--believe me, it will not be her fault if her desire
for revenge has not already been satisfied.

ADOLPH. I must know if it is so!

GUSTAV. Find out!

ADOLPH. Find out?

GUSTAV. Watch--I'll assist you, if you want me to.

ADOLPH. As I am to die anyhow--it may as well come first as last!
What am I to do?

GUSTAV. First of all a piece of information: has your wife any
vulnerable point?

ADOLPH. Hardly! I think she must have nine lives, like a cat.

GUSTAV. There--that was the boat whistling at the landing--now
she'll soon be here.

ADOLPH. Then I must go down and meet her.

GUSTAV. No, you are to stay here. You have to be impolite. If
her conscience is clear, you'll catch it until your ears tingle.
If she is guilty, she'll come up and pet you.

ADOLPH. Are you so sure of that?

GUSTAV. Not quite, because a rabbit will sometimes turn and run in
loops, but I'll follow. My room is nest to this. [He points to the
door on the right] There I shall take up my position and watch you
while you are playing the game in here. But when you are done,
we'll change parts: I'll enter the cage and do tricks with the
snake while you stick to the key-hole. Then we meet in the park to
compare notes. But keep your back stiff. And if you feel yourself
weakening, knock twice on the floor with a chair.

ADOLPH. All right!--But don't go away. I must be sure that you are
in the next room.

GUSTAV. You can be quite sure of that. But don't get scared
afterward, when you watch me dissecting a human soul and laying
out its various parts on the table. They say it is rather hard on
a beginner, but once you have seen it done, you never want to miss
it.--And be sure to remember one thing: not a word about having
met me, or having made any new acquaintance whatever while she was
away. Not one word! And I'll discover her weak point by myself.
Hush, she has arrived--she is in her room now. She's humming to
herself. That means she is in a rage!--Now, straight in the back,
please! And sit down on that chair over there, so that she has to
sit here--then I can watch both of you at the same time.

ADOLPH. It's only fifteen minutes to dinner--and no new guests
have arrived--for I haven't heard the bell ring. That means we
shall be by ourselves--worse luck!

GUSTAV. Are you weak?

ADOLPH. I am nothing at all!--Yes, I am afraid of what is now
coming! But I cannot keep it from coming! The stone has been set
rolling--and it was not the first drop of water that started it--
nor wad it the last one--but all of them together.

GUSTAV. Let it roll then--for peace will come in no other way.
Good-bye for a while now! [Goes out]

(ADOLPH nods back at him. Until then he has been standing with the
photograph in his hand. Now he tears it up and flings the pieces
under the table. Then he sits down on a chair, pulls nervously at
his tie, runs his fingers through his hair, crumples his coat
lapel, and so on.)

TEKLA. [Enters, goes straight up to him and gives him a kiss; her
manner is friendly, frank, happy, and engaging] Hello, little
brother! How is he getting on?

ADOLPH. [Almost won over; speaking reluctantly and as if in jest]
What mischief have you been up to now that makes you come and kiss
me?

TEKLA. I'll tell you: I've spent an awful lot of money.

ADOLPH. You have had a good time then?

TEKLA. Very! But not exactly at that crèche meeting. That was
plain piffle, to tell the truth.--But what has little brother
found to divert himself with while his Pussy was away?

(Her eyes wander around the room as if she were looking for
somebody or sniffing something.)

ADOLPH. I've simply been bored.

TEKLA. And no company at all?

ADOLPH. Quite by myself.

TEKLA. [Watching him; she sits down on the sofa] Who has been
sitting here? ADOLPH. Over there? Nobody.

TEKLA. That's funny! The seat is still warm, and there is a hollow
here that looks as if it had been made by an elbow. Have you had
lady callers?

ADOLPH. I? You don't believe it, do you?

TEKLA. But you blush. I think little brother is not telling the
truth. Come and tell Pussy now what he has on his conscience.

(Draws him toward herself so that he sinks down with his head
resting in her lap.)

ADOLPH. You're a little devil--do you know that?

TEKLA. No, I don't know anything at all about myself.

ADOLPH. You never think about yourself, do you?

TEKLA. [Sniffing and taking notes] I think of nothing but myself--
I am a dreadful egoist. But what has made you turn so philosophical
all at once?

ADOLPH. Put your hand on my forehead.

TEKLA. [Prattling as if to a baby] Has he got ants in his head
again? Does he want me to take them away, does he? [Kisses him on
the forehead] There now! Is it all right now?

ADOLPH. Now it's all right. [Pause]

TEKLA. Well, tell me now what you have been doing to make the time
go? Have you painted anything?

ADOLPH. No, I am done with painting.

TEKLA. What? Done with painting?

ADOLPH. Yes, but don't scold me for it. How can I help it that I
can't paint any longer!

TEKLA. What do you mean to do then?

ADOLPH. I'll become a sculptor.

TEKLA. What a lot of brand new ideas again!

ADOLPH. Yes, but please don't scold! Look at that figure over
there.

TEKLA. [Uncovering the wax figure] Well, I declare!--Who is that
meant for?

ADOLPH. Guess!

TEKLA. Is it Pussy? Has he got no shame at all?

ADOLPH. Is it like?

TEKLA. How can I tell when there is no face?

ADOLPH. Yes, but there is so much else--that's beautiful!

TEKLA. [Taps him playfully on the cheek] Now he must keep still or
I'll have to kiss him.

ADOLPH. [Holding her back] Now, now!--Somebody might come!

TEKLA. Well, what do I care? Can't I kiss my own husband, perhaps?
Oh yes, that's my lawful right.

ADOLPH. Yes, but don't you know--in the hotel here, they don't
believe we are married, because we are kissing each other such a
lot. And it makes no difference that we quarrel now and then, for
lovers are said to do that also.

TEKLA. Well, but what's the use of quarrelling? Why can't he
always be as nice as he is now? Tell me now? Can't he try? Doesn't
he want us to be happy?

ADOLPH. Do I want it? Yes, but--

TEKLA. There we are again! Who has put it into his head that he is
not to paint any longer?

ADOLPH. Who? You are always looking for somebody else behind me
and my thoughts. Are you jealous?

TEKLA. Yes, I am. I'm afraid somebody might take him away from me.

ADOLPH. Are you really afraid of that? You who know that no other
woman can take your place, and that I cannot live without you!

TEKLA. Well, I am not afraid of the women--it's your friends that
fill your head with all sorts of notions.

ADOLPH. [Watching her] You are afraid then? Of what are you
afraid?

TEKLA. [Getting up] Somebody has been here. Who has been here?

ADOLPH. Don't you wish me to look at you?

TEKLA. Not in that way: it's not the way you are accustomed to
look at me.

ADOLPH. How was I looking at you then?

TEKLA. Way up under my eyelids.

ADOLPH. Under your eyelids--yes, I wanted to see what is behind
them.

TEKLA. See all you can! There is nothing that needs to be hidden.
But--you talk differently, too--you use expressions--[studying
him] you philosophise--that's what you do! [Approaches him
threateningly] Who has been here?

ADOLPH. Nobody but my physician.

TEKLA. Your physician? Who is he?

ADOLPH. That doctor from Strömstad.

TEKLA. What's his name?

ADOLPH. Sjöberg.

TEKLA. What did he have to say?

ADOLPH. He said--well--among other things he said--that I am on
the verge of epilepsy--

TEKLA. Among other things? What more did he say?

ADOLPH. Something very unpleasant.

TEKLA. Tell me!

ADOLPH. He forbade us to live as man and wife for a while.

TEKLA. Oh, that's it! Didn't I just guess it! They want to
separate us! That's what I have understood a long time!

ADOLPH. You can't have understood, because there was nothing to
understand.

TEKLA. Oh yes, I have!

ADOLPH. How can you see what doesn't exist, unless your fear of
something has stirred up your fancy into seeing what has never
existed? What is it you fear? That I might borrow somebody else's
eyes in order to see you as you are, and not as you seem to be?

TEKLA. Keep your imagination in check, Adolph! It is the beast
that dwells in man's soul.

ADOLPH. Where did you learn that? From those chaste young men on
the boat--did you?

TEKLA. [Not at all abashed] Yes, there is something to be learned
from youth also.

ADOLPH. I think you are already beginning to have a taste for
youth?

TEKLA. I have always liked youth. That's why I love you. Do you
object?

ADOLPH. No, but I should prefer to have no partners.

TEKLA. [Prattling roguishly] My heart is so big, little brother,
that there is room in it for many more than him.

ADOLPH. But little brother doesn't want any more brothers.

TEKLA. Come here to Pussy now and get his hair pulled because he
is jealous--no, envious is the right word for it!

(Two knocks with a chair are heard from the adjoining room, where
GUSTAV is.)

ADOLPH. No, I don't want to play now. I want to talk seriously.

TEKLA. [Prattling] Mercy me, does he want to talk seriously?
Dreadful, how serious he's become! [Takes hold of his head and
kisses him] Smile a little--there now!

ADOLPH. [Smiling against his will] Oh, you're the--I might almost
think you knew how to use magic!

TEKLA. Well, can't he see now? That's why he shouldn't start any
trouble--or I might use my magic to make him invisible!

ADOLPH. [Gets up] Will you sit for me a moment, Tekla? With the
side of your face this way, so that I can put a face on my figure.

TEKLA. Of course, I will.

[Turns her head so he can see her in profile.]

ADOLPH. [Gazes hard at her while pretending to work at the figure]
Don't think of me now--but of somebody else.

TEKLA. I'll think of my latest conquest.

ADOLPH. That chaste young man?

TEKLA. Exactly! He had a pair of the prettiest, sweetest
moustaches, and his cheek looked like a peach--it was so soft and
rosy that you just wanted to bite it.

ADOLPH. [Darkening] Please keep that expression about the mouth.

TEKLA. What expression?

ADOLPH. A cynical, brazen one that I have never seen before.

TEKLA. [Making a face] This one?

ADOLPH. Just that one! [Getting up] Do you know how Bret Harte
pictures an adulteress?

TEKLA. [Smiling] No, I have never read Bret Something.

ADOLPH. As a pale creature that cannot blush.

TEKLA. Not at all? But when she meets her lover, then she must
blush, I am sure, although her husband or Mr. Bret may not be
allowed to see it.

ADOLPH. Are you so sure of that?

TEKLA. [As before] Of course, as the husband is not capable of
bringing the blood up to her head, he cannot hope to behold the
charming spectacle.

ADOLPH. [Enraged] Tekla!

TEKLA. Oh, you little ninny!

ADOLPH. Tekla!

TEKLA. He should call her Pussy--then I might get up a pretty
little blush for his sake. Does he want me to?

ADOLPH. [Disarmed] You minx, I'm so angry with you, that I could
bite you!

TEKLA. [Playfully] Come and bite me then!--Come!

[Opens her arms to him.]

ADOLPH. [Puts his hands around her neck and kisses her] Yes, I'll
bite you to death!

TEKLA. [Teasingly] Look out--somebody might come!

ADOLPH. Well, what do I care! I care for nothing else in the world
if I can only have you!

TEKLA. And when, you don't have me any longer?

ADOLPH. Then I shall die!

TEKLA. But you are not afraid of losing me, are you--as I am too
old to be wanted by anybody else?

ADOLPH. You have not forgotten my words yet, Tekla! I take it all
back now!

TEKLA. Can you explain to me why you are at once so jealous and so
cock-sure?

ADOLPH. No, I cannot explain anything at all. But it's possible
that the thought of somebody else having possessed you may still
be gnawing within me. At times it appears to me as if our love
were nothing but a fiction, an attempt at self-defence, a passion
kept up as a matter of honor--and I can't think of anything that
would give me more pain than to have _him_ know that I am unhappy.
Oh, I have never seen him--but the mere thought that a person
exists who is waiting for my misfortune to arrive, who is daily
calling down curses on my head, who will roar with laughter when I
perish--the mere idea of it obsesses me, drives me nearer to you,
fascinates me, paralyses me!

TEKLA. Do you think I would let him have that joy? Do you think I
would make his prophecy come true?

ADOLPH. No, I cannot think you would.

TEKLA. Why don't you keep calm then?

ADOLPH. No, you upset me constantly by your coquetry. Why do you
play that kind of game?

TEKLA. It is no game. I want to be admired--that's all!

ADOLPH. Yes, but only by men!

TEKLA. Of course! For a woman is never admired by other women.

ADOLPH. Tell me, have you heard anything--from him--recently?

TEKLA. Not in the last sis months.

ADOLPH. Do you ever think of him?

TEKLA. No!--Since the child died we have broken off our
correspondence.

ADOLPH. And you have never seen him at all?

TEKLA. No, I understand he is living somewhere down on the West
Coast. But why is all this coming into your head just now?

ADOLPH. I don't know. But during the last few days, while I was
alone, I kept thinking of him--how he might have felt when he was
left alone that time.

TEKLA. Are you having an attack of bad conscience?

ADOLPH. I am.

TEKLA. You feel like a thief, do you?

ADOLPH. Almost!

TEKLA. Isn't that lovely! Women can be stolen as you steal
children or chickens? And you regard me as his chattel or personal
property. I am very much obliged to you!

ADOLPH. No, I regard you as his wife. And that's a good deal more
than property--for there can be no substitute. TEKLA. Oh, yes! If
you only heard that he had married again, all these foolish
notions would leave you.--Have you not taken his place with me?

ADOLPH. Well, have I?--And did you ever love him?

TEKLA. Of course, I did!

ADOLPH. And then--

TEKLA. I grew tired of him!

ADOLPH. And if you should tire of me also?

TEKLA. But I won't!

ADOLPH. If somebody else should turn up--one who had all the
qualities you are looking for in a man now--suppose only--then you
would leave me?

TEKLA. No.

ADOLPH. If he captivated you? So that you couldn't live without
him? Then you would leave me, of course?

TEKLA. No, that doesn't follow.

ADOLPH. But you couldn't love two at the same time, could you?

TEKLA. Yes! Why not?

ADOLPH. That's something I cannot understand.

TEKLA. But things exist although you do not understand them. All
persons are not made in the same way, you know.

ADOLPH. I begin to see now!

TEKLA. No, really!

ADOLPH. No, really? [A pause follows, during which he seems to
struggle with some--memory that will not come back] Do you know,
Tekla, that your frankness is beginning to be painful?

TEKLA. And yet it used to be my foremost virtue In your mind, and
one that you taught me.

ADOLPH. Yes, but it seems to me as if you were hiding something
behind that frankness of yours.

TEKLA. That's the new tactics, you know.

ADOLPH. I don't know why, but this place has suddenly become
offensive to me. If you feel like it, we might return home--this
evening!

TEKLA. What kind of notion is that? I have barely arrived and I
don't feel like starting on another trip.

ADOLPH. But I want to.

TEKLA. Well, what's that to me?--You can go!

ADOLPH. But I demand that you take the next boat with me!

TEKLA. Demand?--What arc you talking about?

ADOLPH. Do you realise that you are my wife?

TEKLA. Do you realise that you are my husband?

ADOLPH. Well, there's a difference between those two things.

TEKLA. Oh, that's the way you are talking now!--You have never
loved me!

ADOLPH. Haven't I?

TEKLA. No, for to love is to give.

ADOLPH. To love like a man is to give; to love like a woman is to
take.--And I have given, given, given!

TEKLA. Pooh! What have you given?

ADOLPH. Everything!

TEKLA. That's a lot! And if it be true, then I must have taken it.
Are you beginning to send in bills for your gifts now? And if I
have taken anything, this proves only my love for you. A woman
cannot receive anything except from her lover.

ADOLPH. Her lover, yes! There you spoke the truth! I have been
your lover, but never your husband.

TEKLA. Well, isn't that much more agreeable--to escape playing
chaperon? But if you are not satisfied with your position, I'll
send you packing, for I don't want a husband.

ADOLPH. No, that's what I have noticed. For a while ago, when you
began to sneak away from me like a thief with his booty, and when
you began to seek company of your own where you could flaunt my
plumes and display my gems, then I felt, like reminding you of
your debt. And at once I became a troublesome creditor whom you
wanted to get rid of. You wanted to repudiate your own notes, and
in order not to increase your debt to me, you stopped pillaging my
safe and began to try those of other people instead. Without
having done anything myself, I became to you merely the husband.
And now I am going to be your husband whether you like it or not,
as I am not allowed to be your lover any longer,

TEKLA. [Playfully] Now he shouldn't talk nonsense, the sweet
little idiot!

ADOLPH. Look out: it's dangerous to think everybody an idiot but
oneself!

TEKLA. But that's what everybody thinks.

ADOLPH. And I am beginning to suspect that he--your former
husband--was not so much of an idiot after all.

TEKLA. Heavens! Are you beginning to sympathise with--him?

ADOLPH. Yes, not far from it,

TEKLA. Well, well! Perhaps you would like to make his acquaintance
and pour out your overflowing heart to him? What a striking
picture! But I am also beginning to feel drawn to him, as I am
growing more and more tired of acting as wetnurse. For he was at
least a man, even though he had the fault of being married to me.

ADOLPH. There, you see! But you had better not talk so loud--we
might be overheard.

TEKLA. What would it matter if they took us for married people?

ADOLPH. So now you are getting fond of real male men also, and at
the same time you have a taste for chaste young men?

TEKLA. There are no limits to what I can like, as you may see. My
heart is open to everybody and everything, to the big and the
small, the handsome and the ugly, the new and the old--I love the
whole world.

ADOLPH. Do you know what that means?

TEKLA. No, I don't know anything at all. I just _feel_.

ADOLPH. It means that old age is near.

TEKLA. There you are again! Take care!

ADOLPH. Take care yourself!

TEKLA. Of what?

ADOLPH. Of the knife!

TEKLA. [Prattling] Little brother had better not play with such
dangerous things.

ADOLPH. I have quit playing.

TEKLA. Oh, it's earnest, is it? Dead earnest! Then I'll show you
that--you are mistaken. That is to say--you'll never see it, never
know it, but all the rest of the world will know It. And you'll
suspect it, you'll believe it, and you'll never have another
moment's peace. You'll have the feeling of being ridiculous, of
being deceived, but you'll never get any proof of it. For that's
what married men never get.

ADOLPH. You hate me then?

TEKLA. No, I don't. And I don't think I shall either. But that's
probably because you are nothing to me but a child.

ADOLPH. At this moment, yes. But do you remember how it was while
the storm swept over us? Then you lay there like an infant in arms
and just cried. Then you had to sit on my lap, and I had to kiss
your eyes to sleep. Then I had to be your nurse; had to see that
you fixed your hair before going out; had to send your shoes to
the cobbler, and see that there was food in the house. I had to
sit by your side, holding your hand for hours at a time: you were
afraid, afraid of the whole world, because you didn't have a
single friend, and because you were crushed by the hostility of
public opinion. I had to talk courage into you until my mouth was
dry and my head ached. I had to make myself believe that I was
strong. I had to force myself into believing in the future. And so
I brought you back to life, when you seemed already dead. Then you
admired me. Then I was the man--not that kind of athlete you had
just left, but the man of will-power, the mesmerist who instilled
new nervous energy into your flabby muscles and charged your empty
brain with a new store of electricity. And then I gave you back
your reputation. I brought you new friends, furnished you with a
little court of people who, for the sake of friendship to me, let
themselves be lured into admiring you. I set you to rule me and my
house. Then I painted my best pictures, glimmering with reds and
blues on backgrounds of gold, and there was not an exhibition then
where I didn't hold a place of honour. Sometimes you were St.
Cecilia, and sometimes Mary Stuart--or little Karin, whom King
Eric loved. And I turned public attention in your direction. I
compelled the clamorous herd to see yon with my own infatuated
vision. I plagued them with your personality, forced you literally
down their throats, until that sympathy which makes everything
possible became yours at last--and you could stand on your own
feet. When you reached that far, then my strength was used up, and
I collapsed from the overstrain--in lifting you up, I had pushed
myself down. I was taken ill, and my illness seemed an annoyance
to you at the moment when all life had just begun to smile at you--
and sometimes it seemed to me as if, in your heart, there was a
secret desire to get rid of your creditor and the witness of your
rise. Your love began to change into that of a grown-up sister,
and for lack of better I accustomed myself to the new part of
little brother. Your tenderness for me remained, and even
increased, but it was mingled with a suggestion of pity that had
in it a good deal of contempt. And this changed into open scorn as
my talent withered and your own sun rose higher. But in some
mysterious way the fountainhead of your inspiration seemed to dry
up when I could no longer replenish it--or rather when you wanted
to show its independence of me. And at last both of us began to
lose ground. And then you looked for somebody to put the blame on.
A new victim! For you are weak, and you can never carry your own
burdens of guilt and debt. And so you picked me for a scapegoat
and doomed me to slaughter. But when you cut my thews, you didn't
realise that you were also crippling yourself, for by this time
our years of common life had made twins of us. You were a shoot
sprung from my stem, and you wanted to cut yourself loose before
the shoot had put out roots of its own, and that's why you
couldn't grow by yourself. And my stem could not spare its main
branch--and so stem and branch must die together.

TEKLA. What you mean with all this, of course, is that you have
written my books.

ADOLPH. No, that's what you want me to mean in order to make me
out a liar. I don't use such crude expressions as you do, and I
spoke for something like five minutes to get in all the nuances,
all the halftones, all the transitions--but your hand-organ has
only a single note in it.

TEKLA. Yes, but the summary of the whole story is that you have
written my books.

ADOLPH. No, there is no summary. You cannot reduce a chord into a
single note. You cannot translate a varied life into a sum of one
figure. I have made no blunt statements like that of having
written your books.

TEKLA. But that's what you meant!

ADOLPH. [Beyond himself] I did not mean it.

TEKLA. But the sum of it--

ADOLPH. [Wildly] There can be no sum without an addition. You get
an endless decimal fraction for quotient when your division does
not work out evenly. I have not added anything.

TEKLA. But I can do the adding myself.

ADOLPH. I believe it, but then I am not doing it.

TEKLA. No. but that's what you wanted to do.

ADOLPH. [Exhausted, closing his eyes] No, no, no--don't speak to
me--you'll drive me into convulsions. Keep silent! Leave me alone!
You mutilate my brain with your clumsy pincers--you put your claws
into my thoughts and tear them to pieces!

(He seems almost unconscious and sits staring straight ahead while
his thumbs are bent inward against the palms of his hands.)

TEKLA. [Tenderly] What is it? Are you sick?

(ADOLPH motions her away.)

TEKLA. Adolph!

(ADOLPH shakes his head at her.)

TEKLA. Adolph.

ADOLPH. Yes.

TEKLA. Do you admit that you were unjust a moment ago?

ADOLPH. Yes, yes, yes, yes, I admit!

TEKLA. And do you ask my pardon?

ADOLPH. Yes, yes, yes, I ask your pardon--if you only won't speak
to me!

TEKLA. Kiss my hand then!

ADOLPH. [Kissing her hand] I'll kiss your hand--if you only don't
speak to me!

TEKLA. And now you had better go out for a breath of fresh air
before dinner.

ADOLPH. Yes, I think I need it. And then we'll pack and leave.

TEKLA. No!

ADOLPH. [On his feet] Why? There must be a reason.

TEKLA. The reason is that I have promised to be at the concert to-
night.

ADOLPH. Oh, that's it!

TEKLA. Yes, that's it. I have promised to attend--

ADOLPH. Promised? Probably you said only that you might go, and
that wouldn't prevent you from saying now that you won't go.

TEKLA. No, I am not like you: I keep my word.

ADOLPH. Of course, promises should be kept, but we don't have to
live up to every little word we happen to drop. Perhaps there is
somebody who has made you promise to go.

TEKLA. Yes.

ADOLPH. Then you can ask to be released from your promise because
your husband is sick.

TEKLA, No, I don't want to do that, and you are not sick enough to
be kept from going with me.

ADOLPH. Why do you always want to drag me along? Do you feel safer
then?

TEKLA. I don't know what you mean.

ADOLPH. That's what you always say when you know I mean something
that--doesn't please you.

TEKLA. So-o! What is it now that doesn't please me?

ADOLPH. Oh, I beg you, don't begin over again--Good-bye for a
while!

(Goes out through the door in the rear and then turns to the
right.)

(TEKLA is left alone. A moment later GUSTAV enters and goes
straight up to the table as if looking for a newspaper. He
pretends not to see TEKLA.)

TEKLA. [Shows agitation, but manages to control herself] Oh, is it
you?

GUSTAV. Yes, it's me--I beg your pardon!

TEKLA. Which way did you come?

GUSTAV. By land. But--I am not going to stay, as--

TEKLA. Oh, there is no reason why you shouldn't.--Well, it was
some time ago--

GUSTAV. Yes, some time.

TEKLA. You have changed a great deal.

GUSTAV. And you are as charming as ever, A little younger, if
anything. Excuse me, however--I am not going to spoil your
happiness by my presence. And if I had known you were here, I
should never--

TEKLA. If you don't think it improper, I should like you to stay.

GUSTAV. On my part there could be no objection, but I fear--well,
whatever I say, I am sure to offend you.

TEKLA. Sit down a moment. You don't offend me, for you possess
that rare gift--which was always yours--of tact and politeness.

GUSTAV. It's very kind of you. But one could hardly expect--that
your husband might regard my qualities in the same generous light
as you.

TEKLA. On the contrary, he has just been speaking of you in very
sympathetic terms.

GUSTAV. Oh!--Well, everything becomes covered up by time, like
names cut in a tree--and not even dislike can maintain itself
permanently in our minds.

TEKLA. He has never disliked you, for he has never seen you. And
as for me, I have always cherished a dream--that of seeing you
come together as friends--or at least of seeing you meet for once
in my presence--of seeing you shake hands--and then go your
different ways again.

GUSTAV. It has also been my secret longing to see her whom I used
to love more than my own life--to make sure that she was in good
hands. And although I have heard nothing but good of him, and am
familiar with all his work, I should nevertheless have liked,
before it grew too late, to look into his eyes and beg him to take
good care of the treasure Providence has placed in his possession.
In that way I hoped also to lay the hatred that must have
developed instinctively between us; I wished to bring some peace
and humility into my soul, so that I might manage to live through
the rest of my sorrowful days.

TEKLA. You have uttered my own thoughts, and you have understood
me. I thank you for it!

GUSTAV. Oh, I am a man of small account, and have always been too
insignificant to keep you in the shadow. My monotonous way of
living, my drudgery, my narrow horizons--all that could not
satisfy a soul like yours, longing for liberty. I admit it. But
you understand--you who have searched the human soul--what it cost
me to make such a confession to myself.

TEKLA. It is noble, it is splendid, to acknowledge one's own
shortcomings--and it's not everybody that's capable of it. [Sighs]
But yours has always been an honest, and faithful, and reliable
nature--one that I had to respect--but--

GUSTAV. Not always--not at that time! But suffering purifies,
sorrow ennobles, and--I have suffered!

TEKLA. Poor Gustav! Can you forgive me? Tell me, can you?

GUSTAV. Forgive? What? I am the one who must ask you to forgive.

TEKLA. [Changing tone] I believe we are crying, both of us--we who
are old enough to know better!

GUSTAV. [Feeling his way] Old? Yes, I am old. But you--you grow
younger every day.

(He has by that time manoeuvred himself up to the chair on the
left and sits down on it, whereupon TEKLA sits down on the sofa.)

TEKLA. Do you think so?

GUSTAV. And then you know how to dress.

TEKLA. I learned that from you. Don't you remember how you figured
out what colors would be most becoming to me?

GUSTAV. No.

TEKLA. Yes, don't you remember--hm!--I can even recall how you
used to be angry with me whenever I failed to have at least a
touch of crimson about my dress.

GUSTAV. No, not angry! I was never angry with you.

TEKLA. Oh, yes, when you wanted to teach me how to think--do you
remember? For that was something I couldn't do at all.

GUSTAV. Of course, you could. It's something every human being
does. And you have become quite keen at it--at least when you
write.

TEKLA. [Unpleasantly impressed; hurrying her words] Well, my dear
Gustav, it is pleasant to see you anyhow, and especially in a
peaceful way like this.

GUSTAV. Well, I can hardly be called a troublemaker, and you had a
pretty peaceful time with me.

TEKLA. Perhaps too much so.

GUSTAV. Oh! But you see, I thought you wanted me that way. It was
at least the impression you gave me while we were engaged.

TEKLA. Do you think one really knows what one wants at that time?
And then the mammas insist on all kinds of pretensions, of course.

GUSTAV. Well, now you must be having all the excitement you can
wish. They say that life among artists is rather swift, and I
don't think your husband can be called a sluggard.

TEKLA. You can get too much of a good thing.

GUSTAV. [Trying a new tack] What! I do believe you are still
wearing the ear-rings I gave you?

TEKLA. [Embarrassed] Why not? There was never any quarrel between
us--and then I thought I might wear them as a token--and a
reminder--that we were not enemies. And then, you know, it is
impossible to buy this kind of ear-rings any longer. [Takes off
one of her ear-rings.]

GUSTAV. Oh, that's all right, but what does your husband say of
it?

TEKLA. Why should I mind what he says?

GUSTAV. Don't you mind that?--But you may be doing him an injury.
It is likely to make him ridiculous.

TEKLA. [Brusquely, as if speaking to herself almost] He was that
before!

GUSTAV. [Rises when he notes her difficulty in putting back the
ear-ring] May I help you, perhaps?

TEKLA. Oh--thank you!

GUSTAV. [Pinching her ear] That tiny ear!--Think only if your
husband could see us now!

TEKLA. Wouldn't he howl, though!

GUSTAV. Is he jealous also?

TEKLA. Is he? I should say so!

[A noise is heard from the room on the right.]

GUSTAV. Who lives in that room?

TEKLA. I don't know.--But tell me how you are getting along and
what you are doing?

GUSTAV. Tell me rather how you are getting along?

(TEKLA is visibly confused, and without realising what she is
doing, she takes the cover off the wax figure.)

GUSTAV. Hello! What's that?--Well!--It must be you!

TEKLA. I don't believe so.

GUSTAV. But it is very like you.

TEKLA. [Cynically] Do you think so?

GUSTAV. That reminds me of the story--you know it--"How could
your majesty see that?"

TEKLA, [Laughing aloud] You are impossible!--Do you know any new
stories?

GUSTAV. No, but you ought to have some.

TEKLA. Oh, I never hear anything funny nowadays.

GUSTAV. Is he modest also?

TEKLA. Oh--well--

GUSTAV. Not an everything?

TEKLA. He isn't well just now.

GUSTAV. Well, why should little brother put his nose into other
people's hives?

TEKLA. [Laughing] You crazy thing!

GUSTAV. Poor chap!--Do you remember once when we were just
married--we lived in this very room. It was furnished differently
in those days. There was a chest of drawers against that wall
there--and over there stood the big bed.

TEKLA. Now you stop!

GUSTAV. Look at me!

TEKLA. Well, why shouldn't I?

[They look hard at each other.]

GUSTAV. Do you think a person can ever forget anything that has
made a very deep impression on him?

TEKLA. No! And our memories have a tremendous power. Particularly
the memories of our youth.

GUSTAV. Do you remember when I first met you? Then you were a
pretty little girl: a slate on which parents and governesses had
made a few scrawls that I had to wipe out. And then I filled it
with inscriptions that suited my own mind, until you believed the
slate could hold nothing more. That's the reason, you know, why I
shouldn't care to be in your husband's place--well, that's his
business! But it's also the reason why I take pleasure in meeting
you again. Our thoughts fit together exactly. And as I sit here
and chat with you, it seems to me like drinking old wine of my own
bottling. Yes, it's my own wine, but it has gained a great deal in
flavour! And now, when I am about to marry again, I have purposely
picked out a young girl whom I can educate to suit myself. For the
woman, you know, is the man's child, and if she is not, he becomes
hers, and then the world turns topsy-turvy.

TEKLA. Are you going to marry again?

GUSTAV. Yes, I want to try my luck once more, but this time I am
going to make a better start, so that it won't end again with a
spill.

TEKLA. Is she good looking?

GUSTAV. Yes, to me. But perhaps I am too old. It's queer--now when
chance has brought me together with you again--I am beginning to
doubt whether it will be possible to play the game over again.

TEKLA. How do you mean?

GUSTAV. I can feel that my roots stick in your soil, and the old
wounds are beginning to break open. You are a dangerous woman,
Tekla!

TEKLA. Am I? And my young husband says that I can make no more
conquests.

GUSTAV. That means he has ceased to love you.

TEKLA. Well, I can't quite make out what love means to him.

GUSTAV. You have been playing hide and seek so long that at last
you cannot find each other at all. Such things do happen. You have
had to play the innocent to yourself, until he has lost his
courage. There _are_ some drawbacks to a change, I tell you--there
are drawbacks to it, indeed.

TEKLA. Do you mean to reproach--

GUSTAV. Not at all! Whatever happens is to a certain extent
necessary, for if it didn't happen, something else would--but now
it did happen, and so it had to happen.

TEKLA. _You_ are a man of discernment. And I have never met anybody
with whom I liked so much to exchange ideas. You are so utterly
free from all morality and preaching, and you ask so little of
people, that it is possible to be oneself in your presence. Do you
know, I am jealous of your intended wife!

GUSTAV. And do you realise that I am jealous of your husband?

TEKLA. [Rising] And now we must part! Forever!

GUSTAV. Yes, we must part! But not without a farewell--or what do
you say?

TEKLA. [Agitated] No!

GUSTAV. [Following after her] Yes!--Let us have a farewell! Let us
drown our memories--you know, there are intoxications so deep that
when you wake up all memories are gone. [Putting his arm around
her waist] You have been dragged down by a diseased spirit, who is
infecting you with his own anaemia. I'll breathe new life into
you. I'll make your talent blossom again in your autumn days, like
a remontant rose. I'll---

(Two LADIES in travelling dress are seen in the doorway leading to
the veranda. They look surprised. Then they point at those within,
laugh, and disappear.)

TEKLA. [Freeing herself] Who was that?

GUSTAV. [Indifferently] Some tourists.

TEKLA. Leave me alone! I am afraid of you!

GUSTAV. Why?

TEKLA. You take my soul away from me!

GUSTAV. And give you my own in its place! And you have no soul for
that matter--it's nothing but a delusion.

TEKLA. You have a way of saying impolite things so that nobody can
be angry with you.

GUSTAV. It's because you feel that I hold the first mortgage on
you--Tell me now, when--and--where?

TEKLA. No, it wouldn't be right to him. I think he is still in
love with me, and I don't want to do any more harm.

GUSTAV. He does not love you! Do you want proofs?

TEKLA, Where can you get them?

GUSTAV. [Picking up the pieces of the photograph from the floor]
Here! See for yourself!

TEKLA. Oh, that's an outrage!

GUSTAV. Do you see? Now then, when? And where?

TEKLA. The false-hearted wretch!

GUSTAV. When?

TEKLA. He leaves to-night, with the eight-o'clock boat.

GUSTAV. And then--

TEKLA. At nine! [A noise is heard from the adjoining room] Who can
be living in there that makes such a racket?

GUSTAV. Let's see! [Goes over and looks through the keyhole]
There's a table that has been upset, and a smashed water caraffe--
that's all! I shouldn't wonder if they had left a dog locked up in
there.--At nine o'clock then?

TEKLA. All right! And let him answer for it himself.--What a depth
of deceit! And he who has always preached about truthfulness,
and tried to teach me to tell the truth!--But wait a littlehow
was it now? He received me with something like hostility--didn't
meet me at the landing--and then--and then he made some remark
about young men on board the boat, which I pretended not to hear-
but how could he know? Wait--and then he began to philosophise
about women--and then the spectre of you seemed to be haunting
him--and he talked of becoming a sculptor, that being the art
of the time--exactly in accordance with your old speculations!

GUSTAV. No, really!

TEKLA. No, really?--Oh, now I understand! Now I begin to see what
a hideous creature you are! You have been here before and stabbed
him to death! It was you who had been sitting there on the sofa;
it was you who made him think himself an epileptic--that he had to
live in celibacy; that he ought to rise in rebellion against his
wife; yes, it was you!--How long have you been here?

GUSTAV. I have been here a week.

TEKLA. It was you, then, I saw on board the boat?

GUSTAV. It was.

TEKLA. And now you were thinking you could trap me?

GUSTAV. It has been done.

TEKLA. Not yet!

GUSTAV. Yes!

TEKLA. Like a wolf you went after my lamb. You came here with a
villainous plan to break up my happiness, and you were carrying it
out, when my eyes were opened, and I foiled you.

GUSTAV. Not quite that way, if you please. This is how it happened
in reality. Of course, it has been my secret hope that disaster
might overtake you. But I felt practically certain that no
interference on my part was required. And besides, I have been far
too busy to have any time left for intriguing. But when I happened
to be moving about a bit, and happened to see you with those young
men on board the boat, then I guessed the time had come for me to
take a look at the situation. I came here, and your lamb threw
itself into the arms of the wolf. I won his affection by some sort
of reminiscent impression which I shall not be tactless enough to
explain to you. At first he aroused my sympathy, because he seemed
to be in the same fix as I was once. But then he happened to touch
old wounds--that book, you know, and "the idiot"--and I was seized
with a wish to pick him to pieces, and to mix up these so
thoroughly that they couldn't be put together again--and I
succeeded, thanks to the painstaking way in which you had done the
work of preparation. Then I had to deal with you. For you were the
spring that had kept the works moving, and you had to be taken
apart--and what a buzzing followed!--When I came in here, I didn't
know exactly what to say. Like a chess-player, I had laid a number
of tentative plans, of course, but my play had to depend on your
moves. One thing led to the other, chance lent me a hand, and
finally I had you where I wanted you.--Now you are caught!

TEKLA. No!

GUSTAV. Yes, you are! What you least wanted has happened. The
world at large, represented by two lady tourists--whom I had not
sent for, as I am not an intriguer--the world has seen how you
became reconciled to your former husband, and how you sneaked back
repentantly into his faithful arms. Isn't that enough?

TEKLA. It ought to be enough for your revenge--But tell me, how
can you, who are so enlightened and so right-minded--how is it
possible that you, who think whatever happens must happen, and
that all our actions are determined in advance--

GUSTAV. [Correcting her] To a certain extent determined.

TEKLA. That's the same thing!

GUSTAV. No!

TEKLA. [Disregarding him] How is it possible that you, who hold me
guiltless, as I was driven by my nature and the circumstances into
acting as I did--how can you think yourself entitled to revenge--?

GUSTAV. For that very reason--for the reason that my nature and
the circumstances drove me into seeking revenge. Isn't that giving
both sides a square deal? But do you know why you two had to get
the worst of it in this struggle?

(TEKLA looks scornful.)

GUSTAV. And why you were doomed to be fooled? Because I am
stronger than you, and wiser also. You have been the idiot--and
he! And now you may perceive that a man need not be an idiot
because he doesn't write novels or paint pictures. It might be
well for you to bear this in mind.

TEKLA. Are you then entirely without feelings?

GUSTAV. Entirely! And for that very reason, you know, I am capable
of thinking--in which you have had no experience whatever-and of
acting--in which you have just had some slight experience.

TEKLA. And all this merely because I have hurt your vanity?

GUSTAV. Don't call that MERELY! You had better not go around
hurting other people's vanity. They have no more sensitive spot
than that.

TEKLA. Vindictive wretch--shame on you!

GUSTAV. Dissolute wretch--shame on you!

TEKLA. Oh, that's my character, is it?

GUSTAV. Oh, that's my character, is it?--You ought to learn
something about human nature in others before you give your own
nature free rein. Otherwise you may get hurt, and then there will
be wailing and gnashing of teeth.

TEKLA. You can never forgive:--

GUSTAV. Yes, I have forgiven you!

TEKLA. You!

GUSTAV. Of course! Have I raised a hand against you during all
these years? No! And now I came here only to have a look at you,
and it was enough to burst your bubble. Have I uttered a single
reproach? Have I moralised or preached sermons? No! I played a
joke or two on your dear consort, and nothing more was needed to
finish him.--But there is no reason why I, the complainant,
should be defending myself as I am now--Tekla! Have you nothing at
all to reproach yourself with?

TEKLA. Nothing at all! Christians say that our actions are
governed by Providence; others call it Fate; in either case, are
we not free from all liability?

GUSTAV. In a measure, yes; but there is always a narrow margin
left unprotected, and there the liability applies in spite of all.
And sooner or later the creditors make their appearance.
Guiltless, but accountable! Guiltless in regard to one who is no
more; accountable to oneself and one's fellow beings.

TEKLA. So you came here to dun me?

GUSTAV. I came to take back what you had stolen, not what you had
received as a gift. You had stolen my honour, and I could recover
it only by taking yours. This, I think, was my right--or was it
not?

TEKLA. Honour? Hm! And now you feel satisfied?

GUSTAV. Now I feel satisfied. [Rings for a waiter.]

TEKLA. And now you are going home to your fiancee?

GUSTAV. I have no fiancee! Nor am I ever going to have one. I am
not going home, for I have no home, and don't want one.

(A WAITER comes in.)

GUSTAV. Get me my bill--I am leaving by the eight o'clock boat.

(THE WAITER bows and goes out.)

TEKLA. Without making up?

GUSTAV. Making up? You use such a lot of words that have lost
their--meaning. Why should we make up? Perhaps you want all three
of us to live together? You, if anybody, ought to make up by
making good what you took away, but this you cannot do. You just
took, and what you took you consumed, so that there is nothing
left to restore.--Will it satisfy you if I say like this: forgive
me that you tore my heart to pieces; forgive me that you disgraced
me; forgive me that you made me the laughing-stock of my pupils
through every week-day of seven long years; forgive me that I set
you free from parental restraints, that I released you from the
tyranny of ignorance and superstition, that I set you to rule my
house, that I gave you position and friends, that I made a woman
out of the child you were before? Forgive me as I forgive you!--
Now I have torn up your note! Now you can go and settle your
account with the other one!

TEKLA. What have you done with him? I am beginning to suspect--
something terrible!

GUSTAV. With him? Do you still love him?

TEKLA. Yes!

GUSTAV. And a moment ago it was me! Was that also true?

TEKLA. It was true.

GUSTAV. Do you know what you are then?

TEKLA. You despise me?

GUSTAV. I pity you. It is a trait--I don't call it a fault--just
a trait, which is rendered disadvantageous by its results. Poor
Tekla! I don't know--but it seems almost as if I were feeling a
certain regret, although I am as free from any guilt--as you! But
perhaps it will be useful to you to feel what I felt that time.--
Do you know where your husband is?

TEKLA. I think I know now--he is in that room in there! And he has
heard everything! And seen everything! And the man who sees his
own wraith dies!

(ADOLPH appears in the doorway leading to the veranda. His face is
white as a sheet, and there is a bleeding scratch on one cheek.
His eyes are staring and void of all expression. His lips are
covered with froth.)

GUSTAV. [Shrinking back] No, there he is!--Now you can settle with
him and see if he proves as generous as I have been.--Good-bye!

(He goes toward the left, but stops before he reaches the door.)

TEKLA. [Goes to meet ADOLPH with open arms] Adolph!

(ADOLPH leans against the door-jamb and sinks gradually to the
floor.)

TEKLA. [Throwing herself upon his prostrate body and caressing
him] Adolph! My own child! Are you still alive--oh, speak, speak!--
Please forgive your nasty Tekla! Forgive me, forgive me, forgive
me!--Little brother must say something, I tell him!--No, good God,
he doesn't hear! He is dead! O God in heaven! O my God! Help!

GUSTAV. Why, she really must have loved _him_, too!--Poor creature!

(Curtain.)




PARIAH

INTRODUCTION


Both "Creditors" and "Pariah" were written in the winter of 1888-
89 at Holte, near Copenhagen, where Strindberg, assisted by his
first wife, was then engaged in starting what he called a
"Scandinavian Experimental Theatre." In March, 1889, the two plays
were given by students from the University of Copenhagen, and with
Mrs. von Essen Strindberg as _Tekla_. A couple of weeks later the
performance was repeated across the Sound, in the Swedish city of
Malmö, on which occasion the writer of this introduction, then a
young actor, assisted in the stage management. One of the actors
was Gustav Wied, a Danish playwright and novelist, whose exquisite
art since then has won him European fame. In the audience was Ola
Hansson, a Swedish novelist and poet who had just published a
short story from which Strindberg, according to his own
acknowledgment on playbill and title-page, had taken the name and
the theme of "Pariah."

Mr. Hansson has printed a number of letters (_Tilskueren_,
Copenhagen, July, 1912) written to him by Strindberg about that
time, as well as some very informative comments of his own.
Concerning the performance of Malmö he writes: "It gave me a very
unpleasant sensation. What did it mean? Why had Strindberg turned
my simple theme upsidedown so that it became unrecognisable? Not a
vestige of the 'theme from Ola Hansson' remained. Yet he had even
suggested that he and I act the play together, I not knowing that
it was to be a duel between two criminals. And he had at first
planned to call it 'Aryan and Pariah'--which meant, of course,
that the strong Aryan, Strindberg, was to crush the weak Pariah,
Hansson, _coram populo_."

In regard to his own story Mr. Hansson informs us that it dealt
with "a man who commits a forgery and then tells about it, doing
both in a sort of somnambulistic state whereby everything is left
vague and undefined." At that moment "Raskolnikov" was in the air,
so to speak. And without wanting in any way to suggest imitation,
I feel sure that the groundnote of the story was distinctly
Dostoievskian. Strindberg himself had been reading Nietzsche and
was--largely under the pressure of a reaction against the popular
disapproval of his anti-feministic attitude--being driven more and
more into a superman philosophy which reached its climax in the
two novels "Chandalah" (1889) and "At the Edge of the Sea" (1890).
The Nietzschean note is unmistakable in the two plays contained in
the present volume.

But these plays are strongly colored by something else--by
something that is neither Hansson-Dostoievski nor Strindberg-
Nietzsche. The solution of the problem is found in the letters
published by Mr. Hansson. These show that while Strindberg was
still planning "Creditors," and before he had begun "Pariah," he
had borrowed from Hansson a volume of tales by Edgar Allan Poe. It
was his first acquaintance with the work of Poe, though not with
American literature--for among his first printed work was a
series of translations from American humourists; and not long ago
a Swedish critic (Gunnar Castrén in _Samtiden_, Christiania, June,
1912) wrote of Strindberg's literary beginnings that "he had
learned much from Swedish literature, but probably more from Mark
Twain and Dickens."

The impression Poe made on Strindberg was overwhelming. He returns
to it in one letter after another. Everything that suits his mood
of the moment is "Poesque" or "E. P-esque." The story that seems
to have made the deepest impression of all was "The Gold Bug,"
though his thought seems to have distilled more useful material
out of certain other stories illustrating Poe's theories about
mental suggestion. Under the direct influence of these theories,
Strindberg, according to his own statements to Hansson, wrote the
powerful one-act play "Simoom," and made _Gustav_ in "Creditors"
actually _call forth_ the latent epileptic tendencies in _Adolph_.
And on the same authority we must trace the method of: psychological
detection practised by _Mr. X._ in "Pariah" directly to "The Gold
Bug."

Here we have the reason why Mr. Hansson could find so little of
his story in the play. And here we have the origin of a theme
which, while not quite new to him, was ever afterward to remain a
favourite one with Strindberg: that of a duel between intellect
and cunning. It forms the basis of such novels as "Chandalah" and
"At the Edge of the Sea," but it recurs in subtler form in works
of much later date. To readers of the present day, _Mr. X._--that
striking antithesis of everything a scientist used to stand for in
poetry--is much less interesting as a superman _in spe_ than as an
illustration of what a morally and mentally normal man can do with
the tools furnished him by our new understanding of human ways and
human motives. And in giving us a play that holds our interest as
firmly as the best "love plot" ever devised, although the stage
shows us only two men engaged in an intellectual wrestling match,
Strindberg took another great step toward ridding the drama of its
old, shackling conventions.

The name of this play has sometimes been translated as "The
Outcast," whereby it becomes confused with "The Outlaw," a much
earlier play on a theme from the old Sagas. I think it better,
too, that the Hindu allusion in the Swedish title be not lost, for
the best of men may become an outcast, but the baseness of the
Pariah is not supposed to spring only from lack of social
position.


PARIAH
AN ACT
1889


PERSONS


MR. X., an archaeologist, Middle-aged man.
MR. Y., an American traveller, Middle-aged man.


SCENE

(A simply furnished room in a farmhouse. The door and the windows
in the background open on a landscape. In the middle of the room
stands a big dining-table, covered at one end by books, writing
materials, and antiquities; at the other end, by a microscope,
insect cases, and specimen jars full of alchohol.)

(On the left side hangs a bookshelf. Otherwise the furniture is
that of a well-to-do farmer.)

(MR. Y. enters in his shirt-sleeves, carrying a butterfly-net and
a botany-can. He goes straight up to the bookshelf and takes down
a book, which he begins to read on the spot.)

(The landscape outside and the room itself are steeped in
sunlight. The ringing of church bells indicates that the morning
services are just over. Now and then the cackling of hens is heard
from the outside.)

(MR. X. enters, also in his shirt-sleeves.)

(MR. Y. starts violently, puts the book back on the shelf
upside-down, and pretends to be looking for another volume.)

MR. X. This heat is horrible. I guess we are going to have a
thunderstorm.

MR. Y. What makes you think so?

MR. X. The bells have a kind of dry ring to them, the flies are
sticky, and the hens cackle. I meant to go fishing, but I couldn't
find any worms. Don't you feel nervous?

MR. Y. [Cautiously] I?--A little.

MR. X. Well, for that matter, you always look as if you were
expecting thunderstorms.

MR. Y. [With a start] Do I?

MR. X. Now, you are going away tomorrow, of course, so it is not
to be wondered at that you are a little "journey-proud."--
Anything new?--Oh, there's the mail! [Picks up some letters from
the table] My, I have palpitation of the heart every time I open a
letter! Nothing but debts, debts, debts! Have you ever had any
debts?

MR. Y. [After some reflection] N-no.

MR. X. Well, then you don't know what it means to receive a lot of
overdue bills. [Reads one of the letters] The rent unpaid--the
landlord acting nasty--my wife in despair. And here am I sitting
waist-high in gold! [He opens an iron-banded box that stands on
the table; then both sit down at the table, facing each other]
Just look--here I have six thousand crowns' worth of gold which I
have dug up in the last fortnight. This bracelet alone would bring
me the three hundred and fifty crowns I need. And with all of it I
might make a fine career for myself. Then I could get the
illustrations made for my treatise at once; I could get my work
printed, and--I could travel! Why don't I do it, do you suppose?

MR. Y. I suppose you are afraid to be found out.

MR. X. That, too, perhaps. But don't you think an intelligent
fellow like myself might fix matters so that he was never found
out? I am alone all the time--with nobody watching me--while I am
digging out there in the fields. It wouldn't be strange if I put
something in my own pockets now and then.

MR. Y. Yes, but the worst danger lies in disposing of the stuff.

MR. X. Pooh! I'd melt it down, of course--every bit of it--and
then I'd turn it into coins--with just as much gold in them as
genuine ones, of course--

MR. Y. Of course!

MR. X. Well, you can easily see why. For if I wanted to dabble in
counterfeits, then I need not go digging for gold first. [Pause]
It is a strange thing anyhow, that if anybody else did what I
cannot make myself do, then I'd be willing to acquit him--but I
couldn't possibly acquit myself. I might even make a brilliant
speech in defence of the thief, proving that this gold was _res
nullius_, or nobody's, as it had been deposited at a time when
property rights did not yet exist; that even under existing rights
it could belong only to the first finder of it, as the ground-owner
has never included it in the valuation of his property; and so on.

MR. Y. And probably it would be much easier for you to do this if
the--hm!--the thief had not been prompted by actual need, but by a
mania for collecting, for instance--or by scientific aspirations--
by the ambition to keep a discovery to himself. Don't you think
so?

MR. X. You mean that I could not acquit him if actual need had
been the motive? Yes, for that's the only motive which the law
will not accept in extenuation. That motive makes a plain theft of
it.

MR. Y. And this you couldn't excuse?

MR. X. Oh, excuse--no, I guess not, as the law wouldn't. On the
other hand, I must admit that it would be hard for me to charge a
collector with theft merely because he had appropriated some
specimen not yet represented in his own collection.

MR. Y. So that vanity or ambition might excuse what could not be
excused by need?

MR. X. And yet need ought to be the more telling excuse--the only
one, in fact? But I feel as I have said. And I can no more change
this feeling than I can change my own determination not to steal
under any circumstances whatever.

MR. Y. And I suppose you count it a great merit that you cannot--
hm!--steal?

MR. X. No, my disinclination to steal is just as irresistible as
the inclination to do so is irresistible with some people. So it
cannot be called a merit. I cannot do it, and the other one cannot
refrain!--But you understand, of course, that I am not without a
desire to own this gold. Why don't I take it then? Because I
cannot! It's an inability--and the lack of something cannot be
called a merit. There!

[Closes the box with a slam. Stray clouds have cast their shadows
on the landscape and darkened the room now and then. Now it grows
quite dark as when a thunderstorm is approaching.]

MR. X. How close the air is! I guess the storm is coming all
right.

[MR. Y. gets up and shuts the door and all the windows.]

MR. X. Are you afraid of thunder?

MR. Y. It's just as well to be careful.

(They resume their seats at the table.)

MR. X. You're a curious chap! Here you come dropping down like a
bomb a fortnight ago, introducing yourself as a Swedish-American
who is collecting flies for a small museum--

MR. Y. Oh, never mind me now!

MR. X. That's what you always say when I grow tired of talking
about myself and want to turn my attention to you. Perhaps that
was the reason why I took to you as I did--because you let me
talk about myself? All at once we seemed like old friends. There
were no angles about you against which I could bump myself, no
pins that pricked. There was something soft about your whole
person, and you overflowed with that tact which only well-educated
people know how to show. You never made a noise when you came home
late at night or got up early in the morning. You were patient in
small things, and you gave in whenever a conflict seemed
threatening. In a word, you proved yourself the perfect companion!
But you were entirely too compliant not to set me wondering about
you in the long run--and you are too timid, too easily frightened.
It seems almost as if you were made up of two different
personalities. Why, as I sit here looking at your back in the
mirror over there--it is as if I were looking at somebody else.

(MR. Y. turns around and stares at the mirror.)

MR. X. No, you cannot get a glimpse of your own back, man!--In
front you appear like a fearless sort of fellow, one meeting his
fate with bared breast, but from behind--really, I don't want to
be impolite, but--you look as if you were carrying a burden, or as
if you were crouching to escape a raised stick. And when I look at
that red cross your suspenders make on your white shirt--well, it
looks to me like some kind of emblem, like a trade-mark on a
packing-box--

MR. Y. I feel as if I'd choke--if the storm doesn't break soon--

MR. X. It's coming--don't you worry!--And your neck! It looks as
if there ought to be another kind of face on top of it, a face
quite different in type from yours. And your ears come so close
together behind that sometimes I wonder what race you belong to.
[A flash of lightning lights up the room] Why, it looked as if
that might have struck the sheriff's house!

MR. Y. [Alarmed] The sheriff's!

MR. X. Oh, it just looked that way. But I don't think we'll get
much of this storm. Sit down now and let us have a talk, as you
are going away to-morrow. One thing I find strange is that you,
with whom I have become so intimate in this short time--that yon
are one of those whose image I cannot call up when I am away from
them. When you are not here, and I happen to think of you, I
always get the vision of another acquaintance--one who does not
resemble you, but with whom you have certain traits in common.

MR. Y. Who is he?

MR. X. I don't want to name him, but--I used for several years to
take my meals at a certain place, and there, at the side-table
where they kept the whiskey and the otter preliminaries, I met a
little blond man, with blond, faded eyes. He had a wonderful
faculty for making his way through a crowd, without jostling
anybody or being jostled himself. And from his customary place
down by the door he seemed perfectly able to reach whatever he
wanted on a table that stood some six feet away from him. He
seemed always happy just to be in company. But when he met anybody
he knew, then the joy of it made him roar with laughter, and he
would hug and pat the other fellow as if he hadn't seen a human
face for years. When anybody stepped on his foot, he smiled as if
eager to apologise for being in the way. For two years I watched
him and amused myself by guessing at his occupation and character.
But I never asked who he was; I didn't want to know, you see, for
then all the fun would have been spoiled at once. That man had
just your quality of being indefinite. At different times I made
him out to be a teacher who had never got his licence, a non-
commissioned officer, a druggist, a government clerk, a detective--
and like you, he looked as if made out of two pieces, for the
front of him never quite fitted the back. One day I happened to
read in a newspaper about a big forgery committed by a well-known
government official. Then I learned that my indefinite gentleman
had been a partner of the forger's brother, and that his name was
Strawman. Later on I learned that the aforesaid Strawman used to
run a circulating library, but that he was now the police reporter
of a big daily. How in the world could I hope to establish a
connection between the forgery, the police, and my little man's
peculiar manners? It was beyond me; and when I asked a friend
whether Strawman had ever been punished for something, my friend
couldn't answer either yes or no--he just didn't know! [Pause.]

MR. Y. Well, had he ever been--punished?

MR. X. No, he had not. [Pause.]

MR. Y. And that was the reason, you think, why the police had such
an attraction for him, and why he was so afraid of offending
people?

MR. X. Exactly!

MR. Y. And did you become acquainted with him afterward?

MR. X. No, I didn't want to. [Pause.]

MR. Y. Would you have been willing to make his acquaintance if he
had been--punished?

MR. X. Perfectly!

(MR. Y. rises and walks back and forth several times.)

MR. X. Sit still! Why can't you sit still?

MR. Y. How did you get your liberal view of human conditions? Are
you a Christian?

MR. X. Oh, can't you see that I am not?

(MR. Y. makes a face.)

MR. X. The Christians require forgiveness. But I require
punishment in order that the balance, or whatever you may call it,
be restored. And you, who have served a term, ought to know the
difference.

MR. Y. [Stands motionless and stares at MR. X., first with wild,
hateful eyes, then with surprise and admiration] How--could--you--
know--that?

MR. X. Why, I could see it.

MR. Y. How? How could you see it?

MR. X, Oh, with a little practice. It is an art, like many others.
But don't let us talk of it any more. [He looks at his watch,
arranges a document on the table, dips a pen in the ink-well, and
hands it to MR. Y.] I must be thinking of my tangled affairs.
Won't you please witness my signature on this note here? I am
going to turn it in to the bank at Malmo tomorrow, when I go to
the city with you.

MR. Y. I am not going by way of Malmo.

MR. X. Oh, you are not?

MR. Y. No.

MR. X. But that need not prevent you from witnessing my signature.

MR. Y. N-no!--I never write my name on papers of that kind--

MR. X.--any longer! This is the fifth time you have refused to
write your own name. The first time nothing more serious was
involved than the receipt for a registered letter. Then I began to
watch you. And since then I have noticed that you have a morbid
fear of a pen filled with ink. You have not written a single
letter since you came here--only a post-card, and that you wrote
with a blue pencil. You understand now that I have figured out the
exact nature of your slip? Furthermore! This is something like the
seventh time you have refused to come with me to Malmo, which
place you have not visited at all during all this time. And yet
you came the whole way from America merely to have a look at
Malmo! And every morning you walk a couple of miles, up to the old
mill, just to get a glimpse of the roofs of Malmo in the distance.
And when you stand over there at the right-hand window and look
out through the third pane from the bottom on the left side, yon
can see the spired turrets of the castle and the tall chimney of
the county jail.--And now I hope you see that it's your own
stupidity rather than my cleverness which has made everything
clear to me.

MR. Y. This means that you despise me?

MR. X. Oh, no!

MR. Y. Yes, you do--you cannot but do it!

MR. X. No--here's my hand.

(MR. Y. takes hold of the outstretched hand and kisses it.)

MR. X. [Drawing back his hand] Don't lick hands like a dog!

MR. Y. Pardon me, sir, but you are the first one who has let me
touch his hand after learning--

MR. X. And now you call me "sir!"--What scares me about you is
that you don't feel exonerated, washed clean, raised to the old
level, as good as anybody else, when you have suffered your
punishment. Do you care to tell me how it happened? Would you?

MR. Y. [Twisting uneasily] Yes, but you won't believe what I say.
But I'll tell you. Then you can see for yourself that I am no
ORDINARY criminal. You'll become convinced, I think, that there
are errors which, so to speak, are involuntary--[twisting again]
which seem to commit themselves--spontaneously--without being
willed by oneself, and for which one cannot be held responsible--
May I open the door a little now, since the storm seems to have
passed over?

MR. X. Suit yourself.

MR. Y. [Opens the door; then he sits down at the table and begins
to speak with exaggerated display of feeling, theatrical gestures,
and a good deal of false emphasis] Yes, I'll tell you! I was a
student in the university at Lund, and I needed to get a loan from
a bank. I had no pressing debts, and my father owned some
property--not a great deal, of course. However, I had sent the
note to the second man of the two who were to act as security,
and, contrary to expectations, it came back with a refusal. For a
while I was completely stunned by the blow, for it was a very
unpleasant surprise--most unpleasant! The note was lying in front
of me on the table, and the letter lay beside it. At first my eyes
stared hopelessly at those lines that pronounced my doom--that is,
not a death-doom, of course, for I could easily find other
securities, as many as I wanted--but as I have already said, it
was very annoying just the same. And as I was sitting there quite
unconscious of any evil intention, my eyes fastened upon the
signature of the letter, which would have made my future secure if
it had only appeared in the right place. It was an unusually well-
written signature--and you know how sometimes one may absent-
mindedly scribble a sheet of paper full of meaningless words. I
had a pen in my hand--[picks up a penholder from the table] like
this. And somehow it just began to run--I don't want to claim that
there was anything mystical--anything of a spiritualistic nature
back of it--for that kind of thing I don't believe in! It was a
wholly unreasoned, mechanical process--my copying of that
beautiful autograph over and over again. When all the clean space
on the letter was used up, I had learned to reproduce the
signature automatically--and then--[throwing away the penholder
with a violent gesture] then I forgot all about it. That night I
slept long and heavily. And when I woke up, I could feel that I
had been dreaming, but I couldn't recall the dream itself. At
times it was as if a door had been thrown ajar, and then I seemed
to see the writing-table with the note on it as in a distant
memory--and when I got out of bed, I was forced up to the table,
just as if, after careful deliberation, I had formed an
irrevocable decision to sign the name to that fateful paper. All
thought of the consequences, of the risk involved, had disappeared
no hesitation remained--it was almost as if I was fulfilling
some sacred duty--and so I wrote! [Leaps to his feet] What could
it be? Was it some kind of outside influence, a case of mental
suggestion, as they call it? But from whom could it come? I
was sleeping alone in that room. Could it possibly be my primitive
self--the savage to whom the keeping of faith is an unknown thing--
which pushed to the front while my consciousness was asleep--
together with the criminal will of that self, and its inability to
calculate the results of an action? Tell me, what do you think of
it?

MR. X. [As if he had to force the words out of himself] Frankly
speaking, your story does not convince me--there are gaps in it,
but these may depend on your failure to recall all the details--
and I have read something about criminal suggestion--or I think I
have, at least--hm! But all that is neither here nor there! You
have taken your medicine--and you have had the courage to
acknowledge your fault. Now we won't talk of it any more.

MR. Y. Yes, yes, yes, we must talk of it--till I become sure of my
innocence.

MR. X. Well, are you not?

MR. Y. No, I am not!

MR. X. That's just what bothers me, I tell you. It's exactly what
is bothering me!--Don't you feel fairly sure that every human
being hides a skeleton in his closet? Have we not, all of us,
stolen and lied as children? Undoubtedly! Well, now there are
persons who remain children all their lives, so that they cannot
control their unlawful desires. Then comes the opportunity, and
there you have your criminal.--But I cannot understand why you
don't feel innocent. If the child is not held responsible, why
should the criminal be regarded differently? It is the more
strange because--well, perhaps I may come to repent it later.
[Pause] I, for my part, have killed a man, and I have never
suffered any qualms on account of it.

MR. Y. [Very much interested] Have--you?

MR. X, Yes, I, and none else! Perhaps you don't care to shake
hands with a murderer?

MR. Y. [Pleasantly] Oh, what nonsense!

MR. X. Yes, but I have not been punished,

ME. Y. [Growing more familiar and taking on a superior tone] So
much the better for you!--How did you get out of it?

MR. X. There was nobody to accuse me, no suspicions, no witnesses.
This is the way it happened. One Christmas I was invited to hunt
with a fellow-student a little way out of Upsala. He sent a
besotted old coachman to meet me at the station, and this fellow
went to sleep on the box, drove the horses into a fence, and upset
the whole _equipage_ in a ditch. I am not going to pretend that my
life was in danger. It was sheer impatience which made me hit him
across the neck with the edge of my hand--you know the way--just
to wake him up--and the result was that he never woke up at all,
but collapsed then and there.

MR. Y. [Craftily] And did you report it?

MR. X. No, and these were my reasons for not doing so. The man
left no family behind him, or anybody else to whom his life could
be of the slightest use. He had already outlived his allotted
period of vegetation, and his place might just as well be filled
by somebody more in need of it. On the other hand, my life was
necessary to the happiness of my parents and myself, and perhaps
also to the progress of my science. The outcome had once for all
cured me of any desire to wake up people in that manner, and I
didn't care to spoil both my own life and that of my parents for
the sake of an abstract principle of justice.

MR. Y. Oh, that's the way you measure the value of a human life?

MR. X. In the present case, yes.

MR. Y. But the sense of guilt--that balance you were speaking of?

MR. X. I had no sense of guilt, as I had committed no crime. As a
boy I had given and taken more than one blow of the same kind, and
the fatal outcome in this particular case was simply caused by my
ignorance of the effect such a blow might have on an elderly
person.

MR. Y. Yes, but even the unintentional killing of a man is
punished with a two-year term at hard labour--which is exactly
what one gets for--writing names.

MR. X. Oh, you may be sure I have thought of it. And more than one
night I have dreamt myself in prison. Tell me now--is it really as
bad as they say to find oneself behind bolt and bar?

MR. Y. You bet it is!--First of all they disfigure you by cutting
off your hair, and if you don't look like a criminal before, you
are sure to do so afterward. And when you catch sight of yourself
in a mirror you feel quite sure that you are a regular bandit.

MR. X. Isn't it a mask that is being torn off, perhaps? Which
wouldn't be a bad idea, I should say.

MR. Y. Yes, you can have your little jest about it!--And then they
cut down your food, so that every day and every hour you become
conscious of the border line between life and death. Every vital
function is more or less checked. You can feel yourself shrinking.
And your soul, which was to be cured and improved, is instead put
on a starvation diet--pushed back a thousand years into outlived
ages. You are not permitted to read anything but what was written
for the savages who took part in the migration of the peoples. You
hear of nothing but what will never happen in heaven; and what
actually does happen on the earth is kept hidden from you. You are
torn out of your surroundings, reduced from your own class, put
beneath those who are really beneath yourself. Then you get a
sense of living in the bronze age. You come to feel as if you were
dressed in skins, as if you were living in a cave and eating out
of a trough--ugh!

MR. X. But there is reason back of all that. One who acts as if he
belonged to the bronze age might surely be expected to don the
proper costume.

MR. Y. [Irately] Yes, you sneer! You who have behaved like a man
from the stone age--and who are permitted to live in the golden
age.

MR. X. [Sharply, watching him closely] What do you mean with that
last expression--the golden age?

MR. Y. [With a poorly suppressed snarl] Nothing at all.

MR. X. Now you lie--because you are too much of a coward to say
all you think.

MR. Y. Am I a coward? You think so? But I was no coward when I
dared to show myself around here, where I had had to suffer as I
did.--But can you tell what makes one suffer most while in there?--
It is that the others are not in there too!

MR. X. What others?

MR. Y. Those that go unpunished.

MR. X. Are you thinking of me?

MR. Y. I am.

MR. X. But I have committed no crime.

MR. Y. Oh, haven't you?

MR. X. No, a misfortune is no crime.

MR. Y. So, it's a misfortune to commit murder?

MR. X. I have not committed murder.

MR. Y. Is it not murder to kill a person?

MR. X. Not always. The law speaks of murder, manslaughter, killing
in self-defence--and it makes a distinction between intentional
and unintentional killing. However--now you really frighten me,
for it's becoming plain to me that you belong to the most
dangerous of all human groups--that of the stupid.

MR. Y. So you imagine that I am stupid? Well, listen--would you
like me to show you how clever I am?

MR. X. Come on!

MR. Y. I think you'll have to admit that there is both logic and
wisdom in the argument I'm now going to give you. You have
suffered a misfortune which might have brought you two years at
hard labor. You have completely escaped the disgrace of being
punished. And here you see before you a man--who has also suffered
a misfortune--the victim of an unconscious impulse--and who has
had to stand two years of hard labor for it. Only by some great
scientific achievement can this man wipe off the taint that has
become attached to him without any fault of his own--but in order
to arrive at some such achievement, he must have money--a lot of
money--and money this minute! Don't you think that the other one,
the unpunished one, would bring a little better balance into these
unequal human conditions if he paid a penalty in the form of a
fine? Don't you think so?

MR. X. [Calmly] Yes.

MR. Y. Then we understand each other.--Hm! [Pause] What do you
think would be reasonable?

MR. X. Reasonable? The minimum fine in such a case is fixed by the
law at fifty crowns. But this whole question is settled by the
fact that the dead man left no relatives.

MR. Y. Apparently you don't want to understand. Then I'll have to
speak plainly: it is to me you must pay that fine.

MR. X. I have never heard that forgers have the right to collect
fines imposed for manslaughter. And, besides, there is no
prosecutor.

MR. Y. There isn't? Well--how would I do?

MR. X. Oh, _now_ we are getting the matter cleared up! How much do
you want for becoming my accomplice?

MR. Y. Six thousand crowns.

MR. X. That's too much. And where am I to get them?

(MR. Y. points to the box.)

MR. X. No, I don't want to do that. I don't want to become a
thief.

MR. Y. Oh, don't put on any airs now! Do you think I'll believe
that you haven't helped yourself out of that box before?

MR. X. [As if speaking to himself] Think only, that I could let
myself be fooled so completely. But that's the way with these soft
natures. You like them, and then it's so easy to believe that they
like you. And that's the reason why I have always been on my guard
against people I take a liking to!--So you are firmly convinced
that I have helped myself out of the box before?

MR. Y. Certainly! MR. X. And you are going to report me if you
don't get six thousand crowns?

MR. Y. Most decidedly! You can't get out of it, so there's no use
trying.

MR. X. You think I am going to give my father a thief for son, my
wife a thief for husband, my children a thief for father, my
fellow-workers a thief for colleague? No, that will never happen!--
Now I am going over to the sheriff to report the killing myself.

MR. Y. [Jumps up and begins to pick up his things] Wait a moment!

MR. X. For what?

MR. Y. [Stammering] Oh, I thought--as I am no longer needed--it
wouldn't be necessary for me to stay--and I might just as well
leave.

MR. X. No, you may not!--Sit down there at the table, where you
sat before, and we'll have another talk before you go.

MR. Y. [Sits down after having put on a dark coat] What are you up
to now?

MR. X. [Looking into the mirror back of MR. Y.] Oh, now I have it!
Oh-h-h!

MR. Y. [Alarmed] What kind of wonderful things are you discovering
now?

MR. X. I see in the mirror that you are a thief--a plain, ordinary
thief! A moment ago, while you had only the white shirt on, I
could notice that there was something wrong about my book-shelf. I
couldn't make out just what it was, for I had to listen to you and
watch you. But as my antipathy increased, my vision became more
acute. And now, with your black coat to furnish the needed color
contrast For the red back of the book, which before couldn't be
seen against the red of your suspenders--now I see that you have
been reading about forgeries in Bernheim's work on mental
suggestion--for you turned the book upside-down in putting it back.
So even that story of yours was stolen! For tins reason I think
myself entitled to conclude that your crime must have been
prompted by need, or by mere love of pleasure.

MR. Y. By need! If you only knew--

MR. X. If _you_ only knew the extent of the need I have had to face
and live through! But that's another story! Let's proceed with
your case. That you have been in prison--I take that for granted.
But it happened in America, for it was American prison life you
described. Another thing may also be taken for granted, namely,
that you have not borne your punishment on this side.

MR. Y. How can you imagine anything of the kind?

MR. X. Wait until the sheriff gets here, and you'll learn all
about it.

(MR. Y. gets up.)

ME. X. There you see! The first time I mentioned the sheriff, in
connection with the storm, you wanted also to run away. And when a
person has served out his time he doesn't care to visit an old
mill every day just to look at a prison, or to stand by the
window--in a word, you are at once punished and unpunished. And
that's why it was so hard to make you out. [Pause.]

MR. Y. [Completely beaten] May I go now?

MR. X. Now you can go.

MR. Y. [Putting his things together] Are you angry at me?

MR. X. Yes--would you prefer me to pity you?

MR. Y. [Sulkily] Pity? Do you think you're any better than I?

MR. X. Of course I do, as I AM better than you. I am wiser, and I
am less of a menace to prevailing property rights.

MR. Y. You think you are clever, but perhaps I am as clever as
you. For the moment you have me checked, but in the next move I
can mate you--all the same!

MR. X. [Looking hard at MR. Y.] So we have to have another bout!
What kind of mischief are you up to now?

MR. Y. That's my secret.

MR. X. Just look at me--oh, you mean to write my wife an anonymous
letter giving away MY secret!

MR. Y. Well, how are you going to prevent it? You don't dare to
have me arrested. So you'll have to let me go. And when I am gone,
I can do what I please.

MR. X. You devil! So you have found my vulnerable spot! Do you
want to make a real murderer out of me?

MR. Y. That's more than you'll ever become--coward!

MR. X. There you see how different people are. You have a feeling
that I cannot become guilty of the same kind of acts as you. And
that gives you the upper hand. But suppose you forced me to treat
you as I treated that coachman?

[He lifts his hand as if ready to hit MR. Y.]

MR. Y. [Staring MR. X. straight in the face] You can't! It's too
much for one who couldn't save himself by means of the box over
there.

ME. X. So you don't think I have taken anything out of the box?

MR. Y. You were too cowardly--just as you were too cowardly to
tell your wife that she had married a murderer.

MR. X. You are a different man from what I took you to be--if
stronger or weaker, I cannot tell--if more criminal or less,
that's none of my concern--but decidedly more stupid; that much is
quite plain. For stupid you were when you wrote another person's
name instead of begging--as I have had to do. Stupid you were when
you stole things out of my book--could you not guess that I might
have read my own books? Stupid you were when you thought yourself
cleverer than me, and when you thought that I could be lured into
becoming a thief. Stupid you were when you thought balance could
be restored by giving the world two thieves instead of one. But
most stupid of all you were when you thought I had failed to
provide a safe corner-stone for my happiness. Go ahead and write
my wife as many anonymous letters as you please about her husband
having killed a man--she knew that long before we were married!--
Have you had enough now?

MR. Y. May I go?

MR. X. Now you _have_ to go! And at once! I'll send your things
after you!--Get out of here!

(Curtain.)

THE ROAD TO DAMASCUS




PART I.

English Version by Graham Rawson


CHARACTERS

     THE STRANGER
     THE LADY
     THE BEGGAR
     THE DOCTOR
     HIS SISTER
     AN OLD MAN
     A MOTHER
     AN ABBESS
     A CONFESSOR

     less important figures
     FIRST MOURNER
     SECOND MOURNER
     THIRD MOURNER
     LANDLORD
     CAESAR
     WAITER

     non-speaking
     A SMITH
     MILLER'S WIFE
     FUNERAL ATTENDANTS


SCENES

     SCENE I     Street Corner     SCENE XVII
     SCENE II    Doctor's House    SCENE XVI
     SCENE III   Room in an Hotel  SCENE XV
     SCENE IV    By the Sea        SCENE XIV
     SCENE V     On the Road       SCENE XIII
     SCENE VI    In a Ravine       SCENE XII
     SCENE VII   In a Kitchen      SCENE XI
     SCENE VIII  The 'Rose' Room   SCENE X
     SCENE IX    Convent


First Performance in England by the Stage Society at the Westminster
Theatre, 2nd May 1937

CAST

     THE STRANGER        Francis James
     THE LADY            Wanda Rotha
     THE BEGGAR          Alexander Sarner
     FIRST MOURNER       George Cormack
     SECOND MOURNER      Kenneth Bell
     THIRD MOURNER       Peter Bennett
     FOURTH MOURNER      Bryan Sears
     FIFTH MOURNER       Michael Boyle
     SIXTH MOURNER       Stephen Patrick
     THE LANDLORD        Stephen Jack
     THE DOCTOR          Neil Porter
     HIS SISTER          Olga Martin
     CAESAR              Peter Land
     A WAITER            Peter Bennett
     AN OLD MAN          A. Corney Grain
     A MOTHER            Frances Waring
     THE SMITH           Norman Thomas
     THE MILLER'S WIFE   Julia Sandham
     AN ABBESS           Natalia Moya
     A CONFESSOR         Tristan Rawson

     PRODUCER            Carl H. Jaffe
     ASSISTANT PRODUCER  Ossia Trilling



SCENE I

STREET CORNER

[Street Corner with a seat under a tree; the side-door of a small Gothic
Church nearby; also a post office and a café with chairs outside it.
Both post office and café are shut. A funeral march is heard off,
growing louder sand then fainter. A STRANGER is standing on the edge
of the pavement and seems uncertain which way to go. A church clock
strikes: first the four quarters and then the hour. It is three o'clock.
A LADY enters and greets the STRANGER. She is about to pass him, but
stops.]

STRANGER. It's you! I almost knew you'd come.

LADY. You wanted me: I felt it. But why are you waiting here?

STRANGER. I don't know. I must wait somewhere.

LADY. Who are you waiting for?

STRANGER. I wish I could tell you! For forty years I've been waiting for
something: I believe they call it happiness; or the end of unhappiness.
(Pause.) There's that terrible music again. Listen! But don't go, I beg
you. I'll feel afraid, if you do.

LADY. We met yesterday for the first time; and talked for four hours.
You roused my sympathy, but you mustn't abuse my kindness on that
account.

STRANGER. I know that well enough. But I beg you not to leave me. I'm a
stranger here, without friends; and my few acquaintances seem more like
enemies.

LADY. You have enemies everywhere. You're lonely everywhere. Why did you
leave your wife and children?

STRANGER. I wish I knew. I wish I knew why I still live; why I'm here
now; where I should go and what I should do! Do you believe that the
living can be damned already?

LADY. No.

STRANGER. Look at me.

LADY. Hasn't life brought you a single pleasure?

STRANGER. Not one! If at any time I thought so, it was merely a trap to
tempt me to prolong my miseries. If ripe fruit fell into my hand, it was
poisoned or rotten at the core.

LADY. What is your religion--if you'll forgive the question?

STRANGER. Only this: that when I can bear things no longer, I shall go.

LADY. Where?

STRANGER. Into annihilation. If I don't hold life in my hand, at least I
hold death.... It gives me an amazing feeling of power.

LADY. You're playing with death!

STRANGER. As I've played with life. (Pause.) I was a writer. But in
spite of my melancholy temperament I've never been able to take anything
seriously--not even my worst troubles. Sometimes I even doubt whether
life itself has had any more reality than my books. (A De Profundis is
heard from the funeral procession.) They're coming back. Why must they
process up and down these streets?

LADY. Do you fear them?

STRANGER. They annoy me. The place might be bewitched. No, it's not
death I fear, but solitude; for then one's not alone. I don't know who's
there, I or another, but in solitude one's not alone. The air grows
heavy and seems to engender invisible beings, who have life and whose
presence can be felt.

LADY. You've noticed that?

STRANGER. For some time I've noticed a great deal; but not as I used to.
Once I merely saw objects and events, forms and colours, whilst now I
perceive ideas and meanings. Life, that once had no meaning, has begun
to have one. Now I discern intention where I used to see nothing but
chance. (Pause.) When I met you yesterday it struck me you'd been sent
across my path, either to save me, or destroy me.

LADY. Why should I destroy you?

STRANGER. Because it may be your destiny.

LADY. No such idea ever crossed my mind; it was largely sympathy I felt
for you.... Never, in all my life, have I met anyone like you. I have
only to look at you for the tears to start to my eyes. Tell me, what
have you on your conscience? Have you done something wrong, that's never
been discovered or punished?

STRANGER. You may well ask! No, I've no more sins on my conscience than
other free men. Except this: I determined that life should never make a
fool of me.

LADY. You must let yourself be fooled, more or less, to live at all.

STRANGER. That would seem a kind of duty; but one I wanted to get out
of. (Pause.) I've another secret. It's whispered in the family that I'm
a changeling.

LADY. What's that?

STRANGER. A child substituted by the elves for the baby that was born.

LADY. Do you believe in such things?

STRANGER. No. But, as a parable, there's something to be said for it.
(Pause.) As a child I was always crying and didn't seem to take to
life in this world. I hated my parents, as they hated me. I brooked no
constraint, no conventions, no laws, and my longing was for the woods
and the sea.

LADY. Did you ever see visions?

STRANGER. Never. But I've often thought that two beings were guiding
my destiny. One offers me all I desire; but the other's ever at hand
to bespatter the gifts with filth, so that they're useless to me and
I can't touch them. It's true that life has given me all I asked of
it--but everything's turned out worthless to me.

LADY. You've had everything and yet are not content?

STRANGER. That is the curse....

LADY. Don't say that! But why haven't you desired things that transcend
this life, that can never be sullied?

STRANGER. Because I doubt if there is a beyond.

LADY. But the elves?

STRANGER. Are merely a fairy story. (Pointing to a seat.) Shall we sit
down?

LADY. Yes. Who are you waiting for?

STRANGER. Really, for the post office to open. There's a letter for
me--it's been forwarded on but hasn't reached me. (They sit down.) But
tell me something of yourself now. (The Lady takes up her crochet work.)

LADY. There's nothing to tell.

STRANGER. Strangely enough, I should prefer to think of you like that.
Impersonal, nameless--I only do know one of your names. I'd like to
christen you myself--let me see, what ought you to be called? I've got
it. Eve! (With a gesture towards the wings.) Trumpets! (The funeral
march is heard again.) There it is again! Now I must invent your age,
for I don't know how old you are. From now on you are thirty-four--so
you were born in sixty-four. (Pause.) Now your character, for I don't
know that either. I shall give you a good character, your voice reminds
me of my mother--I mean the idea of a mother, for my mother never
caressed me, though I can remember her striking me. You see, I was
brought up in hate! An eye for an eye--a tooth for a tooth. You see this
scar on my forehead? That comes from a blow my brother gave me with
an axe, after I'd struck him with a stone. I never went to my father's
funeral, because he turned me out of the house when my sister married.
I was born out of wedlock, when my family were bankrupt and in mourning
for an uncle who had taken his life. Now you know my family! That's
the stock I come from. Once I narrowly escaped fourteen years' hard
labour--so I've every reason to thank the elves, though I can't be
altogether pleased with what they've done.

LADY. I like to hear you talk. But don't speak of the elves: it makes me
sad.

STRANGER. Frankly, I don't believe in them; yet they're always making
themselves felt. Are these elves the souls of the unhappy, who still
await redemption? If so, I am the child of an evil spirit. Once I
believed I was near redemption--through a woman. But no mistake could
have been greater: I was plunged into the seventh hell.

LADY. You must be unhappy. But this won't go on always.

STRANGER. Do you think church bells and Holy Water could comfort me?
I've tried them; they only made things worse. I felt like the Devil when
he sees the sign of the cross. (Pause.) Let's talk about you now.

LADY. There's no need. (Pause.) Have you been blamed for misusing your
gifts?

STRANGER. I've been blamed for everything. In the town I lived in no one
was so hated as I. Lonely I came in and lonely I went out. If I entered
a public place people avoided me. If I wanted to rent a room, it would
be let. The priests laid a ban on me from the pulpit, teachers from
their desks and parents in their homes. The church committee wanted
to take my children from me. Then I blasphemously shook my fist... at
heaven!

LADY. Why did they hate you so?

STRANGER. How should I know! Yet I do! I couldn't endure to see men
suffer. So I kept on saying, and writing, too: free yourselves, I will
help you. And to the poor I said: do not let the rich exploit you.
And to the women: do not allow yourselves to be enslaved by the men.
And--worst of all--to the children: do not obey your parents, if they
are unjust. What followed was impossible to foresee. I found that
everyone was against me: rich and poor, men and women, parents and
children. And then came sickness and poverty, beggary and shame,
divorce, law-suits, exile, solitude, and now.... Tell me, do you think
me mad?

LADY. No.

STRANGER. You must be the only one. But I'm all the more grateful.

LADY (rising). I must leave you now.

STRANGER. You, too?

LADY. And you mustn't stay here.

STRANGER. Where should I go?

LADY. Home. To your work.

STRANGER. But I'm no worker. I'm a writer.

LADY. I know. But I didn't want to hurt you. Creative power is something
given you, that can also taken away. See you don't forfeit yours.

STRANGER. Where are you going?

LADY. Only to a shop.

STRANGER (after a pause). Tell me, are you a believer?

LADY. I am nothing.

STRANGER. All the better: you have a future. How I wish I were your old
blind father, whom you could lead to the market place to sing for his
bread. My tragedy is I cannot grow old that's what happens to children
of the elves, they have big heads and never only cry. I wish I were
someone's dog. I could follow him and never be alone again. I'd get a
meal sometimes, a kick now and then, a pat perhaps, a blow often....

LADY. Now I must go. Good-bye. (She goes out.)

STRANGER (absent-mindedly). Good-bye. (He remains on the seat. He takes
off his hat and wipes his forehead. Then he draws on the ground with his
stick. A BEGGAR enters. He has a strange look and is collecting objects
from the gutter.) White are you picking up, beggar?

BEGGAR. Why call me that? I'm no beggar. Have I asked you for anything?

STRANGER. I beg your pardon. It's so hard to judge men from appearances.

BEGGAR. That's true. For instance, can you guess who I am?

STRANGER. I don't intend to try. It doesn't interest me.

BEGGAR. No one can know that in advance. Interest commonly comes
afterwards--when it's too late. Virtus post nummos!

STRANGER. What? Do beggars know Latin?

BEGGAR. You see, you're interested already. Omne tulit punctum qui
miscuit utile dulci. I have always succeeded in everything I've
undertaken, because I've never attempted anything. I should like to call
myself Polycrates, who found the gold ring in the fish's stomach. Life
has given me all I asked of it. But I never asked anything; I grew tired
of success and threw the ring away. Yet, now I've grown old I regret it.
I search for it in the gutters; but as the search takes time, in default
of my gold ring I don't disdain a few cigar stumps....

STRANGER. I don't know whether this beggar's cynical or mad.

BEGGAR. I don't know either.

STRANGER. Do you know who I am?

BEGGAR. No. And it doesn't interest me.

STRANGER. Well, interest commonly comes afterwards.... You see you tempt
me to take the words out of your mouth. And that's the same thing as
picking up other people's cigars.

BEGGAR. So you won't follow my example?

STRANGER. What's that scar on your forehead?

BEGGAR. I got it from a near relation.

STRANGER. Now you frighten me! Are you real? May I touch you? (He
touches his arm.) There's no doubt of it.... Would you deign to accept
a small coin in return for a promise to seek Polycrates' ring in another
part of the town? (He hands him a coin.) Post nummos virtus.... Another
echo. You must go at once.

BEGGAR. I will. But you've given me far too much. I'll return
three-quarters of it. Now we owe one another nothing but friendship.

STRANGER. Friendship! Am I a friend of yours?

BEGGAR. Well, I am of yours. When one's alone in the world one can't be
particular.

STRANGER. Then let me tell you you forget yourself...

BEGGAR. Only too pleased! But when we meet again I'll have a word of
welcome for you. (Exit.)

STRANGER (sitting down again and drawing in the dust with his stick).
Sunday afternoon! A long, dank, sad time, after the usual Sunday dinner
of roast beef, cabbage and watery potatoes. Now the older people are
testing, the younger playing chess and smoking. The servants have gone
to church and the shops are shut. This frightful afternoon, this day of
rest, when there's nothing to engage the soul, when it's as hard to meet
a friend as to get into a wine shop. (The LADY comes back again, she
is noun wearing a flower at her breast.) Strange! I can't speak without
being contradicted at once!

LADY. So you're still here?

STRANGER. Whether I sit here, or elsewhere, and write in the sand
doesn't seem to me to matter--as long so I write in the sand.

LADY. What are you writing? May I see?

STRANGER. I think you'll find: Eve 1864.... No, don't step on it.

LADY. What happens then?

STRANGER. A disaster for you... and for me.

LADY. You know that?

STRANGER. Yes, and more. That the Christmas rose you're wearing is a
mandragora. Its symbolical meaning is malice and calumny; but it was
once used in medicine for the healing of madness. Will you give it me?

LADY (hesitating). As medicine?

STRANGER. Of course. (Pause.) Have you read my books?

LADY. You know I have. And that it's you I have to thank for giving me
freedom and a belief in human rights and human dignity.

STRANGER. Then you haven't read the recent ones?

LADY. No. And if they're not like the earlier ones I don't want to.

STRANGER. Then promise never to open another book of mine.

LADY. Let me think that over. Very well, I promise.

STRANGER. Good! But see you keep your promise. Remember what happened
to Bluebeard's wife when curiosity tempted her into the forbidden
chamber....

LADY. You see, already you make demands like those of a Bluebeard. What
you don't see, or have long since forgotten, is that I'm married, and
that my husband's a doctor, and that he admires your work. So that his
house is open to you, if you wish to be made welcome there.

STRANGER. I've done all I can to forget it. I've expunged it from my
memory so that it no longer has any reality for me.

LADY. If that's so, will you come home with me to-night?

STRANGER. No. Will you come with me?

LADY. Where?

STRANGER. Anywhere! I have no home, only a trunk. Money I sometimes
have--though not often. It's the one thing life has capriciously refused
me, perhaps because I never desired it intensely enough. (The LADY
shakes her head.) Well? What are you thinking?

LADY. I'm surprised I'm not angry with you. But you're not serious.

STRANGER. Whether I am or not's all one to me. Ah! There's the organ! It
won't be long now before the drink shops open.

LADY. Is it true _you_ drink?

STRANGER. Yes. A great deal! Wine makes my soul from her prison, up into
the firmament, where she what has never yet been seen, and hears what
men never yet heard....

LADY. And the day after?

STRANGER. I have the most delightful scruples of conscience! I
experience the purifying emotions of guilt and repentance. I enjoy the
sufferings of the body, whilst my soul hovers like smoke about my head.
It is as if one were suspended between Life and Death, when the spirit
feels that she has already opened her pinions and could fly aloft, if
she would.

LADY. Come into the church for a moment. You'll hear no sermon, only the
beautiful music of vespers.

STRANGER. No. Not into church! It depresses me because I feel I don't
belong there.... That I'm an unhappy soul and that it's as impossible
for me to re-enter as to become a child again.

LADY. You feel all that... already?

STRANGER. Yes. I've got that far. I feel as if I lay hacked in pieces
and were being slowly melted in Medea's cauldron. Either I shall be sent
to the soap-boilers, or arise renewed from my own dripping! It depends
on Medea's skill!

LADY. That sounds like the word of an oracle. We must see if you can't
become a child again.

STRANGER. We should have to start with the cradle; and this time with
the right child.

LADY. Exactly! Wait here for me whilst I go into the church. If the café
were open I'd ask you please not to drink. But luckily it's shut.

(The LADY exits. The STRANGER sits down again and draws in the sand.
Enter six funeral attendants in brown with some mourners. One of them
carries a banner with the insignia of the Carpenters, draped in brown
crêpe; another a large axe decorated with spruce, a third a cushion with
a chairman's mallet. They stop outside the café and wait.)

STRANGER. Excuse me, whose funeral have you been attending?

FIRST MOURNER. A house-breaker's. (He imitates the ticking of a clock.)

STRANGER. A real house-breaker? Or the insect sort, that lodges in the
woodwork and goes 'tick-tick'?

FIRST MOURNER. Both--but mainly the insect sort. What do they call them?

STRANGER (to himself). He wants to fool me into saying the death-watch
beetle. So I won't. You mean a burglar?

SECOND MOURNER. No. (The clock is again heard ticking.)

STRANGER. Are you trying to frighten me? Or does the dead man work
miracles? In that case I'd better explain that my nerves are good, and
that I don't believe in miracles. But I do find it strange that the
mourners wear brown. Why not black? It's cheap and suitable.

THIRD MOURNER. To us, in our simplicity, it looks black; but if Your
Honour wishes it, it shall look brown to you.

STRANGER. A queer company! They give me an uneasy feeling I'd like to
ascribe to the wine I drank yesterday. If I were to ask if that were
spruce, you'd probably say--well what?

FIRST MOURNER. Vine leaves.

STRANGER. I thought it would not be spruce! The café's opening, at last!
(The Café opens, the STRANGER sits at a table and is served with wine.
The MOURNERS sit at the other tables.) They must have been glad to be
rid of him, if the mourners start drinking as soon as the funeral's
over.

FIRST MOURNER. He was a good-for-nothing, who couldn't take life
seriously.

STRANGER. And who probably drank?

SECOND MOURNER. Yes.

THIRD MOURNER. And let others support his wife and children.

STRANGER. He shouldn't have done so. Is that why his friends speak so
well of him now? Please don't shake my table when I'm drinking.

SECOND MOURNER. When I'm drinking, I don't mind.

STRANGER. Well, I do. There's a great difference between us! (The
MOURNERS whisper together. The BEGGAR comes back.) Here's the beggar
again!

BEGGAR (sitting down at a table). Wine. Moselle!

LANDLORD (consulting a police last). I can't serve you: you've not paid
your taxes. Here's your name, age and profession, and the decision of
the court.

BEGGAR. Omnia serviliter pro dominatione! I'm a free man with a
university education. I refused to pay taxes because I didn't want to
become a member of parliament. Moselle!

LANDLORD. You'll get free transport to the poor house, if you don't get
out.

STRANGER. Couldn't you gentlemen settle this somewhere else. You're
disturbing your patrons.

LANDLORD. You can witness I'm in the right.

STRANGER. No. The whole thing's too distressing. Even without paying
taxes he has the right to enjoy life's small pleasures.

LANDLORD. So you're the kind who'd absolve vagabonds from their duties?

STRANGER. This is too much! I'd have you know that I'm a famous man.
(The LANDLORD and MOURNERS laugh.)

LANDLORD. Infamous, probably! Let me look at the police list, and see if
the description tallies: thirty-eight, brown hair, moustache, blue eyes;
no settled employment, means unknown; married, but has deserted his wife
and children; well known for revolutionary views on social questions:
gives impression he is not in full possession of his faculties.... It
fits!

STRANGER (rising, pale and taken aback). What?

LANDLORD. Yes. It fits all right.

BEGGAR. Perhaps he's on the list. And not me!

LANDLORD. It looks like it. In any case, both of you had better clear
out.

BEGGAR (to the STRANGER). Shall we?

STRANGER. We? This begins to look like a conspiracy.

(The church bells are heard. The sun comes out and illuminates the
coloured rose window above the church door, which is now opened,
disclosing the interior. The organ is heard and the choir singing Ave
Maris Stella.)

LADY (coming from the church). Where are you? What are you doing? Why
did you call me? Must you hang on a woman's skirts like a child?

STRANGER. I'm afraid now. Things are happening that have no natural
explanation.

LADY. But you were afraid of nothing. Not even death!

STRANGER. Death... no. But of something else, the unknown.

LADY. Listen. Give me your hand. You're ill, I'll take you to a doctor.
Come!

STRANGER. If you like. But tell me: is this carnival, or... reality?

LADY. It's real enough.

STRANGER. This beggar must be a wretched fellow. Is it true he resembles
me?

LADY. He will, if you go on drinking. Now go to the post office and get
your letter. And then come with me.

STRANGER. No, I won't. It'll only be about lawsuits.

LADY. If not?

STRANGER. Malicious gossip.

LADY. Well, do as you wish. No one can escape his fate. At this moment
I feel a higher power is sitting in judgment on us and has made a
decision.

STRANGER. You feel that, too! I heard the hammer fall just now; and the
chairs being pushed back. The clerk's being sent to find me! Oh, the
suspense! No, I can't follow you.

LADY. Tell me, what have you done to me? In the church I found I
couldn't pray. A light on the altar was extinguished and an icy wind
blew in my face when I heard you call me.

STRANGER. I didn't call you. But I wanted you.

LADY. You're not as weak as you pretend. You have great strength; and
I'm afraid of you....

STRANGER. When I'm alone I've no strength at all; but if I can find
a single companion I grow strong. I shall be strong now; and so I'll
follow you.

LADY. Perhaps you can free me from the werewolf.

STRANGER. Who's he?

LADY. That's what I call him.

STRANGER. Count on me. Killing dragons, freeing princesses, defeating
werewolves--that is Life!

LADY. Then come, my liberator!

(She draws her veil over her face, kisses him on the mouth and hurries
out. The STRANGER stands where he is for a moment, surprised and
stunned. A loud chord sung by women's voices, rather like a cry, is
heard from the church. The rose window suddenly grows dark and the tree
above the seat is shaken by the wind. The MOURNERS rise and look at the
sky, as if they could see something terrifying. The STRANGER hurries out
after the LADY.)


SCENE II

DOCTOR'S HOUSE

[Courtyard enclosed on three sides by a single-storied house with a
tiled roof. Small windows in all three façades. Right, verandah with
glass doors. Left, climbing roses and bee-hives outside the windows. In
the middle of the courtyard a woodpile in the form of a cupola. A well
beside it. The top of a walnut tree is seen above the central façade
of the house. In the corner, right, a garden gate. By the well a large
tortoise. On right, entrance below to a wine-cellar. An ice-chest and
dust-bin. The DOCTOR'S SISTER enters from the verandah with a telegram.]

SISTER. Now misfortune will fall on your house.

DOCTOR. When has it not, my dear sister?

SISTER. This time.... Ingeborg's coming and bringing... guess whom?

DOCTOR. Wait! I know, because I've long foreseen this, even desired it,
for he's a writer I've always admired. I've learnt much from him and
often wished to meet him. Now he's coming, you say. Where did Ingeborg
meet him?

SISTER. In town, it seems. Probably in some literary _salon_.

DOCTOR. I've often wondered whether this man was the boy of the same
name who was my friend at school. I hope not; for he seemed one that
fortune would treat harshly. And in a life-time he'll have given his
unhappy tendencies full scope.

SISTER. Don't let him come here. Go out. Say you're engaged.

DOCTOR. No. One can't escape one's fate.

SISTER. But you've never bowed your head to anyone! Why crawl before
this spectre, and call him fate?

DOCTOR. Life has taught me to. I've wasted time and energy in fighting
the inevitable.

SISTER. But why allow your wife to behave like this? She'll compromise
you both.

DOCTOR. You think so? Because, when I made her break off her engagement
I held out false hopes to her of a life of freedom, instead of the
slavery she'd known. Besides, I could never love her if I were in a
position to give her orders.

SISTER. You'd be friends with your enemy?

DOCTOR. Oh...!

SISTER. Will you let her bring someone into the house who'll destroy
you? If you only knew how I hate that man.

DOCTOR. I do. His last book's terrible; and shows a certain lack of
mental balance.

SISTER. They ought to shut him up.

DOCTOR. Many people have said so, but I don't think him bad enough.

SISTER. Because you're eccentric yourself, and live in daily contact
with a woman who's mad.

DOCTOR. I admit abnormality has always had a strong attraction for me,
and originality is at least not commonplace. (The syren of a steamer is
heard.) What was that?

SISTER. Your nerves are on edge. It's only the steamer. (Pause.) Now, I
implore you, go away!

DOCTOR. I ought to want to; but I'm held fast. (Pause.) From here I can
see his portrait in my study. The sunlight throws a shadow on it that
changes it completely. It makes him look like.... Horrible! You see what
I mean?

HATER. The devil! Come away!

DOCTOR. I can't.

SISTER. Then at least defend yourself.

DOCTOR. I always do. But this time I feel a thunder storm gathering. How
often have I tried to fly, and not been able to. It's as if the earth
were iron and I a compass needle. If misfortune comes, it's not of my
fee choice. They've come in at the door.

SISTER. I heard nothing.

DOCTOR. I did! Now I can see them, too! He _is_ the friend of my
boyhood. He got into trouble at school; but I was blamed and punished.
He was nick-named Caesar, I don't know why.

SISTER. And this man....

DOCTOR. That's what always happens. Caesar! (The LADY comes in.)

LADY. I've brought a visitor.

DOCTOR. I know, and he's welcome.

LADY. I left him in the house, to wash.

DOCTOR. Well, are you satisfied with your conquest?

LADY. I think he's the unhappiest man I ever met.

DOCTOR. That's saying a great deal.

LADY. Yes, there's enough unhappiness for all of us.

DOCTOR. There is! (To his SISTER.) Would you ask him to come out here?
(His SISTER goes out.) Have you had an interesting time?

LADY. Yes. I met a number of strange people. Have you had many patients?

DOCTOR. No. The consulting room's empty this morning. I think the
practice is going down.

LADY (kindly). I'm sorry. Tell me, oughtn't that woodpile to be taken
into the house? It only draws the damp.

DOCTOR (without reproach). Yes, and the bees should be killed, too; and
the fruit in the garden picked. But I've no time to do it.

LADY. You're tired.

DOCTOR. Tired of everything.

LADY (without bitterness). And you've a wife who can't even help you.

DOCTOR (kindly). You mustn't say that, if I don't think so.

LADY (turning towards the verandah). Here he is!

(The STRANGER comes in through the verandah, dressed in a way that makes
him look younger than before. He has an air of forced candour. He seems
to recognise the doctor, and shrinks back, but recovers himself.)

DOCTOR. You're very welcome.

STRANGER. It's kind of you.

DOCTOR. You bring good weather with you. And we need it; for it's rained
for six weeks.

STRANGER. Not for seven? It usually rains for seven if it rains on St.
Swithin's. But that's later on--how foolish of me!

DOCTOR. As you're used to town life I'm afraid you'll find the country
dull.

STRANGER. Oh no. I'm no more at home there than here. Excuse me asking,
but haven't we met before--when we were boys?

DOCTOR. Never.

(The LADY has sat down at the table and is crocheting.)

STRANGER. Are you sure?

DOCTOR. Perfectly. I've followed your literary career from the first
with great interest; as I know my wife has told you. So that if we _had_
met I'd certainly have remembered your name. (Pause.) Well, now you can
see how a country doctor lives!

STRANGER. If you could guess what the life of a so-called liberator's
like, you wouldn't envy him.

DOCTOR. I can imagine it; for I've seen how men love their chains.
Perhaps that's as it should be.

STRANGER (listening). Strange. Who's playing in the village?

DOCTOR. I don't know. Do you, Ingeborg?

LADY. No.

STRANGER. Mendelssohn's Funeral March! It pursues me. I never know
whether I've heard it or not.

DOCTOR. Do you suffer from hallucinations?

STRANGER. No. But I'm pursued by trivial incidents. Can't you hear
anyone playing?

DOCTOR. Yes.

LADY. Someone _is_ playing. Mendelssohn.

DOCTOR. Not surprising.

STRANGER. No. But that it should be played precisely at the right place,
at the right time.... (He gets up.)

DOCTOR. To reassure you, I'll ask my sister. (Exit through the
verandah.)

STRANGER (to the LADY). I'm stifling here. I can't pass a night under
this roof. Your husband looks like a werewolf and in his presence you
turn into a pillar of salt. Murder has been done in this house; the
place is haunted. I shall escape as soon as I can find an excuse.

(The DOCTOR comes back.)

DOCTOR. It's the girl at the post office.

STRANGER (nervously). Good. That's all right. You've an original house.
That pile of wood, for instance.

DOCTOR. Yes. It's been struck by lightning twice.

STRANGER. Terrible! And you still keep it?

DOCTOR. That's why. I've made it higher out of defiance; and to give
shade in summer. It's like the prophet's gourd. But in the autumn it
must go into the wood shed.

STRANGER (looking round). Christmas roses, too! Where did you get them?
They're flowering in summer! Everything's upside down here.

DOCTOR. They were given me by a patient. He's not quite sane.

STRANGER. Is he staying in the house?

DOCTOR. Yes. He's a quiet soul, who ponders on the purposelessness
of nature. He thinks it foolish for hellebore to grow in the snow and
freeze; so he puts the plants in the cellar and beds them out in the
spring.

STRANGER. But a madman... in the house. Most unpleasant!

DOCTOR. He's very harmless.

STRANGER. How did he lose his wits?

DOCTOR. Who can tell. It's a disease of the mind, not the body.

STRANGER. Tell me--is he here--now?

DOCTOR. Yes. He's free to wander in the garden and arrange creation. But
if his presence disquiets you, we can shut him up.

STRANGER. Why aren't such poor devils put out of--their misery?

DOCTOR. It's hard to know whether they're ripe....

STRANGER. What for?

DOCTOR. For what's to come.

STRANGER. There _is_ nothing. (Pause.)

DOCTOR. Who knows!

STRANGER. I feel strangely uneasy. Have you medical material...
specimens... dead bodies?

DOCTOR. Oh yes. In the ice-box--for the authorities, you know. (He pulls
out an arm and leg.) Look here.

STRANGER. No. Too much like Bluebeard!

DOCTOR (sharply). What do you mean by that? (Looking at the LADY.) Do
you think I kill my wives?

STRANGER. Oh no. It's clear you don't. Is this house haunted, too?

DOCTOR. Oh yes. Ask my wife.(He disappears behind the wood pile where
neither the STRANGER nor the LADY can see him.)

LADY. You needn't whisper, my husband's deaf. Though he can lip read.

STRANGER. Then let me say that I've never known a more painful
half-hour. We exchange the merest commonplaces, because none of us has
the courage to say what he thinks. I suffered so that the idea came to
me of opening my veins to get relief. But now I'd like to tell him the
truth and have done with it. Shall we say to his face that we mean to go
away, and that you've had enough of his foolishness?

LADY. If you talk like that I'll begin to hate you. You must behave
under any circumstances.

STRANGER. How well brought up you are! (The DOCTOR now becomes visible
to the STRANGER and the LADY, who continue their conversation.) Come
away with me, before the sun goes down. (Pause.) Tell me, why did you
kiss me yesterday?

LADY. But....

STRANGER. Supposing he could hear what we say! I don't trust him.

DOCTOR. What shall we do to amuse our guest?

LADY. He doesn't care much for amusement. His life's not been happy.

(The DOCTOR blows a whistle. The MADMAN comes into the garden. He wears
a laurel wreath and his clothes are curious.)

DOCTOR. Come here, Caesar.

STRANGER (displeased). What? Is he called Caesar?

DOCTOR. No. It's a nickname I gave him, to remind me of a boy I was at
school with.

STRANGER (disturbed). Oh?

DOCTOR. He was involved in a strange incident, and I got all the blame.

LADY (to the STRANGER). You'd never believe a boy could have been so
corrupt.

(The STRANGER looks distressed. The MADMAN comes nearer.)

DOCTOR. Caesar, come and make your bow to our famous writer.

CAESAR. Is this the great man?

LADY (to the DOCTOR). Why did you let him come, if it annoys our guest?

DOCTOR. Caesar, you must behave. Or I shall have to whip you.

CAESAR. Yes. He is Caesar, but he's not great. He doesn't even know
which came first, the hen or the egg. But I do.

STRANGER (to the LADY). I shall go. Is this a trap? What am I to think?
In a minute he'll unloose his bees to amuse me.

LADY. Trust me... whatever happens! And turn your face away when you
speak.

STRANGER. This werewolf never leaves us.

DOCTOR (looking at his watch). You must excuse me for about an hour.
I've a patient to visit. I hope the time won't hang on your hands.

STRANGER. I'm used to waiting, for what never comes....

DOCTOR (to the MADMAN). Come along, Caesar. I must lock you up in the
cellar. (He goes out with the MADMAN.)

STRANGER (to the LADY). What does that mean? Someone's pursuing me! You
told me your husband was well disposed towards me, and I believed you.
But he can't open his mouth without wounding me. Every word pricks like
a goad. Then this funeral march... it's really being played! And here,
once more, Christmas roses! Why does everything follow in an eternal
round? Dead bodies, beggars, madmen, human destinies and childhood
memories? Come away. Let me free you from this hell.

LADY. That's why I brought you here. Also that it could never be said
you'd stolen the wife of another. But one thing I must ask you: can I
put my trust in you?

STRANGER. You mean in my feelings?

LADY. I don't speak of them. We're taking them for granted. They'll
endure as long as they'll endure.

STRANGER. You mean in my position? Large sums are owed me. All I have to
do is to write or telegraph....

LADY. Then I will trust you. (Putting away her work.) Now go straight
out of that door. Follow the syringa hedge till you find a gate. We'll
meet in the next village.

STRANGER (hesitating). I don't like leaving the back way. I'd rather
have fought it out with him here.

LADY. Quick!

STRANGER. Won't you come with me?

LADY. Yes. But then I must go first. (She turns and blows a kiss towards
the verandah.) My poor werewolf!


SCENE III

ROOM IN AN HOTEL

[The STRANGER enters followed by the LADY. A WAITER.]

STRANGER (who is carrying a suitcase). Is no other room free?

WAITER. No.

STRANGER. I don't want this one.

LADY. But it's the only one: the other hotels are all full.

STRANGER (to the WAITER). You can go. (The LADY sinks on to a chair
without taking off her hat and coat.) What is it you want?

LADY. I wish you'd kill me.

STRANGER. I don't wonder! Thrown out of hotels, because we're not
married, and pestered by the police, we're forced to come to this place,
the last I'd have wished. To this very room, number eight.... Someone
must be against me!

LADY. Is this eight?

STRANGER. What? Have you been here before?

LADY. Have you?

STRANGER. Yes.

LADY. Then let's get away. Onto the road, into the woods. It doesn't
matter where.

STRANGER. I should like to. But after this terrible time I'm as tired as
you are. I felt this was to be our journey's end. I resisted, I tried to
go in the opposite direction, but trains were late, or we missed them,
and we had to come here. To this room! The devil's in it--at least what
I call the devil. But I'll be even with him yet.

LADY. It seems we'll never find peace on earth again.

STRANGER. Nothing's been changed. The dying Christmas roses. (Looking
at two pictures.) There he is again. And that's the Hotel Breuer in
Montreux. I've stayed there, too.

LADY. Did you go to the post office?

STRANGER. I thought you'd ask me that. I did. And as an answer to five
letters and three telegrams I found a telegram saying that my publisher
had gone away for a fortnight.

LADY. Then we're lost.

STRANGER. Very nearly.

LADY. The waiter will be back in five minutes and ask for our passports.
Then the landlord will come up and tell us to go.

STRANGER. Then only one course remains.

LADY. Two.

STRANGER. The second's impossible.

LADY. What is the second?

STRANGER. To go to your parents in the country.

LADY. You're beginning to read my thoughts.

STRANGER. We no longer have any secrets from one another.

LADY. Then the whole dream's at an end.

STRANGER. It maybe.

LADY. You must telegraph again.

STRANGER. I ought to, I know. But I can't stir from here. I no longer
believe that what I do can succeed. Someone's paralysed me.

LADY. And me! We decided never to speak of the past and yet we drag it
with us. Look at this carpet. Those flowers seem to form....

STRANGER. Him! It's him. He's everywhere. How many hundred times has
he.... Yet I see someone else in the pattern of the table cloth. No,
it's an illusion! Any moment now I'll hear my funeral march--then
everything will be complete. (Listening.) There!

LADY. I hear nothing.

STRANGER. Am I... am I....

LADY. Shall we go home?

STRANGER. The last place. The worst of all! To arrive like an
adventurer, a beggar. Impossible!

LADY. Yes, I know, but.... No, it would be too much. To bring shame,
disgrace and sorrow to the old people, and to see you humiliated, and
you me! We could never respect one another again.

STRANGER. It would be worse than death. Yet I feel it's inevitable, and
I begin to long for it, to get it over quickly, if it must be.

LADY (taking out her work). But I don't want to be reviled in your
presence. We must find another way. If only we were married--and divorce
would be easy, because my former marriage isn't recognised by the laws
of the country in which it was contracted.... All we need do is to go
away and be married by the same priest... but that would be wounding for
you!

STRANGER. It would match the rest! For this honeymoon's becoming a
pilgrimage!

LADY. You're right! The landlord will be here in five minutes to turn us
out. There's only one way to end such humiliations. Of our own free will
we must accept the worst.... I can hear footsteps!

STRANGER. I've foreseen this and am ready. Ready for everything. If I
can't overcome the unseen, I can show you how much I can endure.... You
must pawn your jewellery. I can buy it back when my publisher gets home,
if he's not drowned bathing or killed in a railway accident. A man as
ambitious as I must be ready to sacrifice his honour first of all.

LADY. As we're agreed, wouldn't it be better to give up this room? Oh,
God! He's coming now.

STRANGER. Let's go. We'll run the gauntlet of waiters, maids and
servants. Red with shame and pale with indignation. Animals have their
lairs to hide in, but we are forced to flaunt our shame. (Pause.) Let
down your veil.

LADY. So this is freedom!

STRANGER. And I... am the liberator. (Exeunt.)


SCENE IV

BY THE SEA

[A hut on a cliff by the sea. Outside it a table with chairs. The
STRANGER and the LADY are dressed in less sombre clothing and look
younger than in the previous scene. The LADY is doing crochet work.]

STRANGER. Three peaceful happy days at my wife's side, and anxiety
returns!

LADY. What do you fear?

STRANGER. That this will not last long.

LADY. Why do you think so?

STRANGER. I don't know. I believe it must end suddenly, terribly.
There's something deceptive even the sunshine and the stillness. I feel
that happiness if not part of my destiny.

LADY. But it's all over! My parents are resigned to what we've done. My
husband understands and has written a kind letter.

STRANGER. What does that matter? Fate spins the web; once more I
hear the mallet fall and the chairs being pushed back from the
table--judgment has been pronounced. Yet that must have happened before
I was born, because even in childhood I began to serve my sentence.
There's no moment in my life on which can look back with happiness.

LADY. Unfortunate man! Yet you've had everything you wished from life!

STRANGER. Everything. Unluckily I forgot to wish for money.

LADY. You're thinking of that again.

STRANGER. Are you surprised?

LADY. Quiet!

STRANGER. What is it you're always working at? You sit there like one of
the Fates and draw the threads through your fingers. But go on. The most
beautiful of sights is a woman bending over her work, or over her child.
What are you making?

LADY. Nothing. Crochet work.

STRANGER. It looks like a network of nerves and knots on which you've
fixed your thoughts. The brain must look like that--from within.

LADY. If only I thought of half the things you imagine.... But I think
of nothing.

STRANGER. Perhaps that's why I feel so contented when I'm with you. Why,
I find you so perfect that I can no longer imagine life without you! Now
the clouds have blown away. Now the sky is clear! The wind soft--feel
how it caresses us! This is Life! Yes, now I live. And I feel my spirit
growing, spreading, becoming tenuous, infinite. I am everywhere, in the
ocean which is my blood, in the rocks that are my bones, in the trees,
in the flowers; and my head reaches up to the heavens. I can survey the
whole universe. I _am_ the universe. And I feel the power of the Creator
within me, for I am He! I wish I could grasp the all in my hand and
refashion it into something more perfect, more lasting, more beautiful.
I want all creation and created beings to be happy, to be born without
pain, live without suffering, and die in quiet content. Eve! Die with me
now! This moment, for the next will bring sorrow again.

LADY. I'm not ready to die.

STRANGER. Why not?

LADY. I believe there are things I've not yet done. Perhaps I've not
suffered enough.

STRANGER. Is that the purpose of life?

LADY. It seems to be. (Pause.) Now I want to ask one thing of you.

STRANGER. Well?

LADY. Don't blaspheme against heaven again, or compare yourself with the
Creator, for then you remind me of Caesar at home.

STRANGER (excitedly). Caesar! How can you say that...?

LADY. I'm sorry if I've said anything I shouldn't. It was foolish of me
to say 'at home.' Forgive me.

STRANGER. You were thinking that Caesar and I resemble one another in
our blasphemies?

LADY. Of course not.

STRANGER. Strange. I believe you when you say you don't mean to hurt me;
yet you _do_ hurt me, as all the others do. Why?

LADY. Because you're over-sensitive.

STRANGER. You say that again! Do you think I've sensitive hidden places?

LADY. No. I didn't mean that. And now the spirits of suspicion and
discord are coming between us. Drive them away--at once.

STRANGER. You mustn't say I blaspheme if I use the well-known words:
See, we are like unto the gods.

LADY. But if that's so, why can't you help yourself, or us?

STRANGER. Can't I? Wait. As yet we've only seen the beginning.

LADY. If the end is like it, heaven help us!

STRANGER. I know what you fear; and I meant to hold back a pleasant
surprise. But now I won't torment you longer. (He takes out a registered
letter, not yet opened.) Look!

LADY. The money's come!

STRANGER. This morning. Who can destroy me now?

LADY. Don't speak like that. You know who could.

STRANGER. Who?

LADY. He who punishes the arrogance of men.

STRANGER. And their courage. That especially. This was my Achilles'
heel; I bore with everything, except this fearful lack of money.

LADY. May I ask how much they've sent?

STRANGER. I don't know. I've not opened the letter. But I do know about
how much to expect. I'd better look and see. (He opens the letter.)
What? Only an account showing I'm owed nothing! There's something
uncanny in this.

LADY. I begin to think so, too.

STRANGER. I know I'm damned. But I'm ready to hurl the curse back at him
who so nobly cursed me.... (He throws up the letter.) With a curse of my
own.

LADY. Don't. You frighten me.

STRANGER. Fear me, so long as you don't despise me! The challenge
has been thrown down; now you shall see a conflict between two great
opponents. (He opens his coat and waistcoat and looks threateningly
aloft.) Strike me with your lightning if you dare! Frighten me with your
thunder if you can!

LADY. Don't speak like that.

STRANGER. I will. Who dares break in on my dream of love? Who tears the
cup from my lips; and the woman from my arms? Those who envy me, be
they gods or devils! Little bourgeois gods who parry sword thrusts with
pin-pricks from behind, who won't stand up to their man, but strike at
him with unpaid bills. A backstairs way of discrediting a master before
his servants. They never attack, never draw, merely soil and decry!
Powers, lords and masters! All are the same!

LADY. May heaven not punish you.

STRANGER. Heaven's blue and silent. The ocean's silent and stupid.
Listen, I can hear a poem--that's what I call it when an idea begins to
germinate in my mind. First the rhythm; this time like the thunder
of hooves and the jingle of spurs and accoutrements. But there's a
fluttering too, like a sail flapping.... Banners!

LADY. No. It's the wind. Can't you hear it in the trees?

STRANGER. Quiet! They're riding over a bridge, a wooden bridge. There's
no water in the brook, only pebbles. Wait! Now I can hear them, men and
women, saying a rosary. The angels' greeting. Now I can see--on what
you're working--a large kitchen, with white-washed walls, it has three
small latticed windows, with flowers in them. In the left-hand corner a
hearth, on the right a table with wooden seats. And above the table, in
the corner, hangs a crucifix, with a lamp burning below. The ceiling's
of blackened beams, and dried mistletoe hangs on the wall.

LADY (frightened). Where can you see all that?

STRANGER. On your work.

LADY. Can you see people there?

STRANGER. A very old man's sitting at the table, bent over a game bag,
his hands clasped in prayer. A woman, so longer young, kneels on the
floor. Now once more I hear the angels' greeting, as if far away. But
those two in the kitchen are as motionless as figures of wax. A veil
shrouds everything.... No, that was no poem! (Waking.) It was something
else.

LADY. It was reality! The kitchen at home, where you've never set foot.
That old man was my grandfather, the forester, and the woman my mother!
They were praying for us! It was six o'clock and the servants were
saying a rosary outside, as they always do.

STRANGER. You make me uneasy. Is this the beginning of second sight?
Still, it was beautiful. A snow-white room, with flowers and mistletoe.
But why should they pray for us?

LADY. Why indeed! Have we done wrong?

STRANGER. What is wrong?

LADY. I've read there's no such thing. And yet... I long to see my
mother; not my father, for he turned me out as he did her.

STRANGER. Why should he have turned your mother out?

LADY. Who can say? The children least of all. Let us go to my home. I
long to.

STRANGER. To the lion's den, the snake pit? One more or less makes no
matter. I'll do it for you, but not like the Prodigal Son. No, you shall
see that I can go through fire and water for your sake.

LADY. How do you know...?

STRANGER. I can guess.

LADY. And can you guess that the path to where my parents live in the
mountains is too steep for carts to use?

STRANGER. It sounds extraordinary, but I read or dreamed something of
the kind.

LADY. You may have. But you'll see nothing that's not natural, though
perhaps unusual, for men and women are a strange race. Are you ready to
follow me?

STRANGER. I'm ready--for anything!

(The LADY kisses him on the forehead and makes the sign of the cross
simply, timidly and without gestures.)

LADY. Then come!


SCENE V

ON THE ROAD

[A landscape with hills; a chapel, right, in the far distance on a rise.
The road, flanked by fruit trees, winds across the background. Between
the trees hills can be seen on which are crucifixes, chapels and
memorials to the victims of accidents. In the foreground a sign post
with the legend, 'Beggars not allowed in this parish.' The STRANGER and
the LADY.]

LADY. You're tired.

STRANGER. I won't deny it. But it's humiliating to confess I'm hungry,
because the money's gone. I never thought that would happen to me.

LADY. It seems we must be prepared for anything, for I think we've
fallen into disfavour. My shoe's split, and I could weep at our having
to go like this, looking like beggars.

STRANGER (pointing to the signpost). And beggars are not allowed in this
parish. Why must that be stuck up in large letters here?

LADY. It's been there as long as I can remember. Think of it, I've not
been back since I was a child. And In those days I found the way short
and the hills lower. The trees, too, were smaller, and I think I used to
hear birds singing.

STRANGER. Birds sang all the year for you then! Now they only sing in
the spring--and autumn's not far off. But in those days you used to
dance along this endless way of Calvaries, plucking flowers at the feet
of the crosses. (A horn in the distance.) What's that?

LADY. My grandfather coming back from shooting. A good old man. Let's go
on and reach the house by dark.

STRANGER. Is it still far?

LADY. No. Only across the hills and over the river.

STRANGER. Is that the river I hear?

LADY. The river by which I was born and brought up. I was eighteen
before I crossed over to this bank, to see what was in the blue of the
distance.... Now I've seen.

STRANGER. You're weeping!

LADY. Poor old man! When I got into the boat, he said: My child, beyond
lies the world. When you've seen enough, come back to your mountains,
and they will hide you. Now I've seen enough. Enough!

STRANGER. Let's go. It's beginning to grow dusk already. (They pick up
their travelling capes and go on.)


SCENE VI

IN A RAVINE

[Entrance to a ravine between steep cliffs covered with pines. In the
foreground a wooden shanty, a broom by the door with a ramshorn hanging
from its handle. Left, a smithy, a red glow showing through its open
door. Right, a flourmill. In the background the road through the ravine
with mill-stream and footbridge. The rock formations look like giant
profiles.]

[On the rise of the curtain the SMITH is at the smithy door and the
MILLER'S WIFE at the door of the mill. When the LADY enters they sign
to one another and disappear. The clothing of both the LADY and the
STRANGER is torn and shabby.]

STRANGER. They're hiding, from us, probably.

LADY. I don't think so.

STRANGER. What a strange place! Everything seems conspire to arouse
disquiet. What's that broom there? And the horn with ointment? Probably
because it's their usual place, but it makes me think of witchcraft.
Why is the smithy black and the mill white? Because one's sooty and the
other covered with flour; yet when I saw the blacksmith by the light of
his forge and the white miller's wife, it reminded me of an old poem.
Look at those giant faces.... There's your werewolf from whom I saved
you. There he is, in profile, see!

LADY. Yes, but it's only the rock.

STRANGER. Only the rock, and yet it's he.

LADY. Shall I tell you why we can see him?

STRANGER. You mean--it's our conscience? Which pricks us when we're
hungry and tired, and is silent when we've eaten and rested. It's
horrible to arrive in rags. Our clothes are torn from climbing through
the brambles. Someone's fighting against me.

LADY. Why did you challenge him?

STRANGER. Because I want to fight in the open; not battle with unpaid
bills and empty purses. Anyhow: here's my last copper. The devil take
it, if there is one! (He throws it into the brook.)

LADY. Oh! We could have paid the ferry with it. Now we'll have to talk
of money when we reach home.

STRANGER. When can we talk of anything else?

LADY. That's because you've despised it.

STRANGER. As I've despised everything....

LADY. But not everything's despicable. Some things are good.

STRANGER. I've never seen them.

LADY. Then follow me and you will.

STRANGER. I'll follow you. (He hesitates when passing the smithy.)

LADY (who has gone on ahead). Are you frightened of fire?

STRANGER. No, but... (The horn is heard in the distance. He hurries past
the smithy after the LADY.)


SCENE VII

IN A KITCHEN

[A large kitchen with whitewashed walls. Three windows in the corner,
right, so arranged that two are at the back and one in the right wall.
The windows are small and deeply recessed; in the recesses there are
flower pots. The ceiling is beamed and black with soot. In the left
corner a large range with utensils of copper, iron and tin, and wooden
vessels. In the corner, right, a crucifix with a lamp. Beneath it a
four-cornered table with benches. Bunches of mistletoe on the walls.
A door at the back. The Poorhouse can be seen outside, and through the
window at the back the church. Near the fire bedding for dogs and a
table with food for the poor.]

[The OLD MAN is sitting at the table beneath the crucifix, with his
hands clasped and a game bag before him. He is a strongly-built man of
over eighty with white hair and along beard, dressed as a forester. The
MOTHER is kneeling on the floor; she is grey-haired and nearly fifty;
her dress is of black-and-white material. The voices of men, women and
children can be clearly heard singing the last verse of the Angels'
Greeting in chorus. 'Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us poor sinners,
now and in the hour of death. Amen.']

OLD MAN and MOTHER. Amen!

MOTHER. Now I'll tell you, Father. They saw two vagabonds by the river.
Their clothing was torn and dirty, for they'd been in the water. And
when it came to paying the ferryman, they'd no money. Now they're drying
their clothes in the ferryman's hut.

OLD MAN. Let them stay there.

MOTHER. Don't forbid a beggar your house. He might be an angel.

OLD MAN. True. Let them come in.

MOTHER. I'll put food for them on the table for the poor. Do you mind
that?

OLD MAN. No.

MOTHER. Shall I give them cider?

OLD MAN. Yes. And you can light the fire; they'll be cold.

MOTHER. There's hardly time. But I will, if you wish it, Father.

OLD MAN (looking out of the window). I think you'd better.

MOTHER. What are you looking at?

OLD MAN. The river; it's rising. And I'm asking myself, as I've done for
seventy years--when I shall reach the sea.

MOTHER. You're sad to-night, Father.

OLD MAN.... et introibo ad altare Dei: ad Deum qui laetificat juventutem
meam. Yes. I do feel sad.... Deus, Deus meus: quare tristis es anima
mea, et quare conturbas me.

MOTHER. Spera in Deo....

(The Maid comes in, and signs to the MOTHER, who goes over to her. They
whisper together and the maid goes out again.)

OLD MAN. I heard what you said. O God! Must I bear that too!

MOTHER. You needn't see them. You can go up to your room.

OLD MAN. No. It shall be a penance. But why come like this: as
vagabonds?

MOTHER. Perhaps they lost their way and have had much to endure.

OLD MAN. But to bring her husband! Is she lost to shame?

MOTHER. You know Ingeborg's queer nature. She thinks all she does is
fitting, if not right. Have you ever seen her ashamed, or suffer from a
rebuff? I never have. Yet she's not without shame; on the contrary. And
everything she does, however questionable, seems natural when she does
it.

OLD MAN. I've always wondered why one could never be angry with her. She
doesn't feel herself responsible, or think an insult's directed at her.
She seems impersonal; or rather two persons, one who does nothing but
ill whilst the other gives absolution.... But this man! There's no one
I've hated from afar so much as he. He sees evil everywhere; and of no
one have I heard so much ill.

MOTHER. That's true. But it may be Ingeborg's found some mission in this
man's life; and he in hers. Perhaps they're meant to torture each other
into atonement.

OLD MAN. Perhaps. But I'll have nothing to do with at seems to me
shameful. This man, under my roof! Yet I must accept it, like everything
else. For I've deserved no less.

MOTHER. Very well then. (The LADY and the STRANGER come in.) You're
welcome.

LADY. Thank you, Mother. (She looks over to the OLD MAN, who rises and
looks at the STRANGER.) Peace, Grandfather. This is my husband. Give him
your hand.

OLD MAN. First let me look at him. (He goes to the STRANGER, puts his
hands on his shoulders and looks him in the eyes.) What motives brought
you here?

STRANGER (simply). None, but to keep my wife company, at her earnest
desire.

OLD MAN. If that's true, you're welcome! I've a long and stormy life
behind me, and at last I've found a certain peace in solitude. I beg you
not to trouble it.

STRANGER. I haven't come here to ask favours. I'll take nothing with me
when I go.

OLD MAN. That's not the answer I wanted; for we all need one another. I
perhaps need you. No one can know, young man.

LADY. Grandfather!

OLD MAN. Yes, my child. I shan't wish you happiness, for there's no such
thing; but I wish you strength to bear your destiny. Now I'll leave you
for a little. Your mother will look after you. (He goes out.)

LADY (to her mother). Did you lay that table for us, Mother?

MOTHER. No, it's a mistake, as you can imagine.

LADY. I know we look wretched. We were lost in the mountains, and if
grandfather hadn't blown his horn...

MOTHER. Your grandfather gave up hunting long ago.

LADY. Then it was someone else.... Listen, Mother, I'll go up now to the
'rose' room, and get it straight.

MOTHER. Do. I'll come in a moment.

(The LADY would like to say something, cannot, and goes out.)

STRANGER (to the MOTHER). I've seen this room already.

MOTHER. And I've seen you. I almost expected you.

STRANGER. As one expects a disaster?

MOTHER. Why say that?

STRANGER. Because I sow devastation wherever I go. But as I must go
somewhere, and cannot change my fate, I've lost my scruples.

MOTHER. Then you're like my daughter--she, too, has no scruples and no
conscience.

STRANGER. What?

MOTHER. You think I'm speaking ill of her? I couldn't do that of my own
child. I only draw the comparison, because you know her.

STRANGER. But I've noticed what you speak of in Eve.

MOTHER. Why do you call Ingeborg Eve?

STRANGER. By inventing a name for her I made her mine. I wanted to
change her....

MOTHER. And remake her in your image? (Laughing.) I've been told that
country wizards carve images of their victims, and give them the names
of those they'd bewitch. That was your plan: by means of this Eve, that
you yourself had made, you intended to destroy the whole Sex!

STRANGER (looking at the MOTHER in surprise). Those were damnable words!
Forgive me. But you have religious beliefs: how can you think such
things?

MOTHER. The thoughts were yours.

STRANGER. This begins to be interesting. I imagined an idyll in the
forest, but this is a witches' cauldron.

MOTHER. Not quite. You've forgotten, or never knew, that a man deserted
me shamefully, and that you're a man who also shamefully deserted a
woman.

STRANGER. Frank words. Now I know where I am.

MOTHER. I'd like to know where I am. Can you support two families?

STRANGER. If all goes well.

MOTHER. All doesn't--in this life. Money can be lost.

STRANGER. But my talent's capital I can never lose.

MOTHER. Really? The greatest of talents has been known to fail...
gradually, or suddenly.

STRANGER. I've never met anyone who could so damp one's courage.

MOTHER. Pride should be damped. Your last book was much weaker.

STRANGER. You read it?

MOTHER. Yes. That's why I know all your secrets. So don't try to deceive
me; it won't go well with you. (Pause.) A trifle, but one that does us
no good here: why didn't you pay the ferryman?

STRANGER. My heel of Achilles! I threw my last coin away. Can't we speak
of something else than money in this house?

MOTHER. Oh yes. But in this house we do our duty before we amuse
ourselves. So you came on foot because you had no money?

STRANGER (hesitating). Yes....

MOTHER (smiling). Probably nothing to eat?

STRANGER (hesitating). No....

MOTHER. You're a fine fellow!

STRANGER. In all my life I've never been in such a predicament.

MOTHER. I can believe it. It's almost a pity. I could laugh at the
figure you cut, if I didn't know it would make you weep, and others with
you. (Pause.) But now you've had your will, hold fast to the woman who
loves you; for if you leave her, you'll never smile again, and soon
forget what happiness was.

STRANGER. Is that a threat?

MOTHER. A warning. Go now, and have your supper.

STRANGER (pointing at the table for the poor). There?

MOTHER. A poor joke; which might become reality. I've seen such things.

STRANGER. Soon I'll believe anything can happen--this is the worst I've
known.

MOTHER. Worse yet may come. Wait!

STRANGER (cast down). I'm prepared for anything.

(Exit. A moment later the OLD MAN comes in.)

OLD MAN. It was no angel after all.

MOTHER. No good angel, certainly.

OLD MAN. Really! (Pause.) You know how superstitious people here are. As
I went down to the river I heard this: a farmer said his horse shied at
'him'; another that the dogs got so fierce he'd had to tie them up. The
ferryman swore his boat drew less water when 'he' got in. Superstition,
but....

MOTHER. But what?

OLD MAN. It was only a magpie that flew in at her window, though it was
closed. An illusion, perhaps.

MOTHER. Perhaps. But why does one often see such things at the right
time?

OLD MAN. This man's presence is intolerable. When he looks at me I can't
breathe.

MOTHER. We must try to get rid of him. I'm certain he won't care to stay
for long.

OLD MAN. No. He won't grow old here. (Pause.) Listen, I got a letter
to-night warning me about him. Among other things he's wanted by the
courts.

MOTHER. The courts?

OLD MAN. Yes. Money matters. But, remember, the laws of hospitality
protect beggars and enemies. Let him stay a few days, till he's got over
this fearful journey. You can see how Providence has laid hands on him,
how his soul is being ground in the mill ready for the sieve....

MOTHER. I've felt a call to be a tool in the hands of Providence.

OLD MAN. Don't confuse it with your wish for vengeance.

MOTHER. I'll try not to, if I can.

OLD MAN. Well, good-night.

MOTHER. Do you think Ingeborg has read his last book?

OLD MAN. It's unlikely. If she had she'd never have married a man who
held such views.

MOTHER. No, she's not read it. But now she must.


SCENE VIII

THE 'ROSE' ROOM

[A simple, pleasantly furnished room in the forester's house. The walls
are colour-washed in red; the curtains are of thin rose-coloured
muslin. In the small latticed windows there are flowers. On right, a
writing-table and bookshelf. Left, a sofa with rose-coloured curtains
above in the form of a baldachino. Tables and chairs in Old German
style. At the back, a door. Outside the country can be seen and the
poorhouse, a dark, unpleasant building with black, uncurtained windows.
Strong sunlight. The LADY is sitting on the sofa working.]

MOTHER (standing with a book bound in rose-coloured cloth in her hand.)
You won't read your husband's book?

LADY. Not that one. I promised not to.

MOTHER. You don't want to know the man to whom you've entrusted your
fate?

LADY. What would be the use? We're all right as we are.

MOTHER. You make no great demands on life?

LADY. Why should I? They'd never be fulfilled.

MOTHER. I don't know whether you were born full of worldly wisdom, or
foolishness.

LADY. I don't know myself.

MOTHER. If the sun shines and you've enough to eat, you're content.

LADY. Yes. And when it goes in, I make the best of it.

MOTHER. To change the subject: did you know your husband was being
pressed by the courts on account of his debts?

LADY. Yes. It happens to all writers.

MOTHER. Is he mad, or a rascal?

LADY. He's neither. He's no ordinary man; and it's a pity I can tell
him nothing he doesn't know already. That's why we don't speak much; but
he's glad to have me near him; and so am I to be near him.

MOTHER. You've reached calm water already? Then it can't be far to the
mill-race! But don't you think you'd have more to talk of, if you read
what he has written?

LADY. Perhaps. You can leave me the book, if you like.

MOTHER. Take it and hide it. It'll be a surprise if you can quote
something from his masterpiece.

LADY (hiding the book in her bag). He's coming. If he's spoken of he
seems to feel it from afar.

MOTHER. If he could only feel how he makes others suffer--from afar.
(Exit left.)

(The LADY, alone for an instant, looks at the book and seems taken
aback. She hides it in her bag.)

STRANGER (entering). Your mother was here? You were speaking of me, of
course. I can almost hear her ill-natured words. They cut the air and
darken the sunshine. I can almost divine the impression of her body in
the atmosphere of the room, and she leaves an odour like that of a dead
snake.

LADY. You're irritable to-day.

STRANGER. Fearfully. Some fool has restrung my nerves out of tune, and
plays on them with a horse-hair bow till he sets my teeth on edge....
You don't know what that is! There's someone here who's stronger than
I! Someone with a searchlight who shines it at me, wherever I may be. Do
they use the black art in this place?

LADY. Don't turn your back on the sunlight. Look at this lovely country;
you'll feel calmer.

STRANGER. I can't bear that poorhouse. It seems to have been built there
solely for me. And a demented woman always stands there beckoning.

LADY. Do you think they treat you badly here?

STRANGER. In a way, no. They feed me with tit-bits, as if I were to be
fattened for the butcher. But I can't eat because they grudge it me, and
I feel the cold rays of their hate. To me it seems there's an icy wind
everywhere, although it's still and hot. And I can hear that accursèd
mill....

LADY. It's not grinding now.

STRANGER. Yes. Grinding... grinding.

LADY. Listen. There's no hate here. Pity, at most.

STRANGER. Another thing.... Why do people I meet cross themselves?

LADY. Only because they're used to praying in silence. (Pause.) You had
an unwelcome letter this morning?

STRANGER. Yes. The kind that makes your hair rise from the scalp, so
that you want to curse at fate. I'm owed money, but can't get paid.
Now the law's being set in motion against me by... the guardians of my
children, because I've not paid alimony. No one has ever been in such
a dishonourable position. I'm blameless. I could pay my way; I want to,
but am prevented! Not my fault; yet my shame! It's not in nature. The
devil's got a hand in it.

LADY. Why?

STRANGER. Why? Why is one born into this world an ignoramus, knowing
nothing of the laws, customs and usage one inadvertently breaks? And
for which one's punished. Why does one grow into a youth full of high
ambition only to be driven into vile actions one abhors? Why, why?

LADY (who has secretly been looking at the book: absent-mindedly). There
must be a reason, even if we don't know it.

STRANGER. If it's to humble one, it's a poor method. It only makes me
more arrogant. Eve!

LADY. Don't call me that.

STRANGER (starting). Why not?

LADY. I don't like it. You'd feel as I do, if I called you Caesar.

STRANGER. Have we got back to that?

LADY. To what?

STRANGER. Did you mention that name for any reason?

LADY. Caesar? No. But I'm beginning to find things out.

STRANGER. Very well! Then I may as well fall honourably by my own
hand. I am Caesar, the school-boy, for whose escapade your husband, the
werewolf, was punished. Fate delights in making links for eternity.
A noble sport! (The LADY, uncertain what to do, does not reply.) Say
something!

LADY. I can't.

STRANGER. Say that he became a werewolf because, as a child, he lost
his belief in the justice of heaven, owing to the fact that, though
innocent, he was punished for the misdeeds of another. But if you say
so, I shall reply that I suffered ten times as much from my conscience,
and that the spiritual crisis that followed left me so strengthened that
I've never done such a thing again.

LADY. No. It's not that.

STRANGER. Then what is it? Do you respect me no longer?

LADY. It's not that either.

STRANGER. Then it's to make me feel my shame before you! And it would be
the end of everything between us.

LADY. No!

STRANGER. Eve.

LADY. You rouse evil thoughts.

STRANGER. You've broken your vow: you've been reading my book!

LADY. I have.

STRANGER. Then you've done wrong.

LADY. My intention was good.

STRANGER. The results even of your good intentions are terrible! You've
blown me into the air with my own petard. Why must all our misdeeds come
home to roost--both boyish escapades and really evil action? It's fair
enough to reap evil where one has sown it. But I've never seen a good
action get its reward. Never! It's a disgrace to Him who records all
sins, however black or venial. No man could do it: men would forgive.
The gods... never!

LADY. Don't say that. Say rather _you_ forgive.

STRANGER. I'm not small-minded. But what have I forgive you?

LADY. More than I can say.

STRANGER. Say it. Perhaps then we'll be quits.

LADY. He and I used to read the curse of Deutertonomy over you... for
you'd ruined his life.

STRANGER. What curse is that?

LADY. From the fifth book of Moses. The priests chant it in chorus when
the fasts begin.

STRANGER. I don't remember it. What does it matter--a curse more or
less?

LADY. In my family those whom we curse, are struck.

STRANGER. I don't believe it. But I do believe that evil emanates from
this house. May it recoil upon it! That is my prayer! Now, according to
custom, it would be my duty to shoot myself; but I can't, so long as I
have other duties. You see, I can't even die, and so I've lost my last
treasure--what, with reason, I call my religion. I've heard that man can
wrestle with God, and with success; but not even job could fight against
Satan. (Pause.) Let's speak of you....

LADY. Not now. Later perhaps. Since I've got to know your terrible
book--I've only glanced at it, only read a few lines here and there--I
feel as if I'd eaten of the tree of knowledge. My eyes are opened and I
know what's good and what's evil, as I've never known before. And now
I see how evil you are, and why I am to be called Eve. She was a mother
and brought sin into the world: it was another mother who brought
expiation. The curse of mankind was called down on us by the first,
a blessing by the second. In me you shall not destroy my whole sex.
Perhaps I have a different mission in your life. We shall see!

STRANGER. So you've eaten of the tree of knowledge? Farewell.

LADY. You're going away?

STRANGER. I can't stay here.

LADY. Don't go.

STRANGER. I must. I must clear up everything. I'll take leave of the old
people now. Then I'll come back. I shan't be long. (Exit.)

LADY (remains motionless, then goes to the door and looks out. She sinks
to her knees). No! He won't come back!

Curtain.


SCENE IX

CONVENT

[The refectory of an ancient convent, resembling a simple whitewashed
Romanesque church. There are damp patches on the walls, looking like
strange figures. A long table with bowls; at the end a desk for the
Lector. At the back a door leading to the chapel. There are lighted
candles on the tables. On the wall, left, a painting representing the
Archangel Michael killing the Fiend.]

[The STRANGER is sitting left, at a refectory table, dressed in the
white clothing of a patient, with a bowl before him. At the table,
right, are sitting: the brown-clad mourners of Scene I. The BEGGAR. A
woman in mourning with two children. A woman who resembles the Lady, but
who is not her and who is crocheting instead of eating. A Man very like
the Doctor, another like the Madman. Others like the Father, Mother,
Brother. Parents of the 'Prodigal Son,' etc. All are dressed in white,
but over this are wearing costumes of coloured crêpe. Their faces are
waxen and corpse-like, their whole appearance queer, their gestures
strange. On the rise of the curtain all are finishing a Paternoster,
except the STRANGER.]

STRANGER (rising and going to the ABBESS, who is standing at a serving
table). Mother. May I speak to you?

ABBESS (in a black-and-white Augustinian habit). Yes, my son. (They come
forward.)

STRANGER. First, where am I?

ABBESS. In a convent called 'St. Saviour.' You were found on the hills
above the ravine, with a cross you'd broken from a calvary and with
which you were threatening someone in the clouds. Indeed, you thought
you could see him. You were feverish and had lost your foothold. You
were picked up, unhurt, beneath a cliff, but in delirium. You were
brought to the hospital and put to bed. Since then you've spoken wildly,
and complained of a pain in your hip, but no injury could be found.

STRANGER. What did I speak of?

ABBESS. You had the usual feverish dreams. You reproached yourself with
all kinds of things, and thought you could see your victims, as you
called them.

STRANGER. And then?

ABBESS. Your thoughts often turned to money matters. You wanted to pay
for yourself in the hospital. I tried to calm you by telling you no
payment would be asked: all was done out of charity....

STRANGER. I want no charity.

ABBESS. It's more blessed to give than to receive; yet a noble nature
can accept and be thankful.

STRANGER. I want no charity.

ABBESS. Hm!

STRANGER. Tell me, why will none of those people sit at the same table
with me? They're getting up... going....

ABBESS. They seem to fear you.

STRANGER. Why?

ABBESS. You look so....

STRANGER. I? But what of them? Are they real?

ABBESS. If you mean true, they've a terrible reality. It may be they
look strange to you, because you're still feverish. Or there may be
another reason.

STRANGER. I seem to know them, all of them! I see them as if in a
mirror: they only make as if they were eating.... Is this some drama
they're performing? Those look like my parents, rather like... (Pause.)
Hitherto I've feared nothing, because life was useless to me.... Now I
begin to be afraid.

ABBESS. If you don't believe them real, I'll ask the Confessor to
introduce you. (She signs to the CONFESSOR who approaches.)

CONFESSOR (dressed in a black-and-white habit of Dominicans). Sister!

ABBESS. Tell the patient who are at that table.

CONFESSOR. That's soon done.

STRANGER. Permit a question first. Haven't we met already?

CONFESSOR. Yes. I sat by your bedside, when you were delirious. At your
desire, I heard your confession.

STRANGER. What? My confession?

CONFESSOR. Yes. But I couldn't give you absolution; because it seemed
that what you said was spoken in fever.

STRANGER. Why?

CONFESSOR. There was hardly a sin or vice you didn't take upon
yourself--things so hateful you'd have had to undergo strict penitence
before demanding absolution. Now you're yourself again I can ask whether
there are grounds for your self-accusations.

(The ABBESS leaves them.)

STRANGER. Have you the right?

CONFESSOR. No. In truth, no right. (Pause.) But you want to know in
whose company you are! The very best. There, for instance, is a madman,
Caesar, who lost his wits through reading the works of a certain writer
whose notoriety is greater than his fame. There's a beggar, who won't
admit he's a beggar, because he's learnt Latin and is free. There, a
doctor, called the werewolf, whose history's well known. There, two
parents, who grieved themselves to death over a son who raised his
hand against theirs. He must be responsible for refusing to follow his
father's bier and desecrating his mother's grave. There's his unhappy
sister, whom he drove out into the snow, as he himself recounts, with
the best intentions. Over there's a woman who's been abandoned with her
two children, and there's another doing crochet work.... All are old
acquaintances. Go and greet them!

(The STRANGER has turned his back on the company: he now goes to the
table, left, and sits down with his back to them. He raises his head,
sees the picture of the Archangel Michael and lowers his eyes. The
CONFESSOR stands behind the STRANGER. A Catholic Requiem can be heard
from the chapel. The CONFESSOR speaks to the STRANGER in a low voice
while the music goes on.)

          Quantus tremor est futurus
          Quando judex est venturus
          Cuncta stricte discussurus,
          Tuba mirum spargens sonum
          Per sepulchra regionum
          Coget omnes ante thronum.
          Mors stupebit et natura,
          Cum resurget creatura
          Judicanti responsura
          Liber scriptus proferetur
          In quo totum continetur
          Unde mundus judicetur.
          Judex ergo cum sedebit
          Quidquid latet apparebit
          Nil inultum remanebit.

(He goes to the desk by the table, right, and opens his breviary. The
music ceases.)

We will continue the reading.... 'But if thou wilt not hearken unto the
voice of the Lord thy God all these curses shall overtake thee. Cursèd
shalt thou be in the city, and cursèd shalt thou be in the field; cursèd
shalt thou be when thou comest in, and cursèd when thou goest out.'

OMNES (in a low voice). Cursèd!

CONFESSOR. 'The Lord shall send upon thee vexation and rebuke in all
that thou settest thy hand for to do, until thou be destroyed, and until
thou perish quickly, because of the wickedness of thy doings, whereby
thou hast forsaken me.'

OMNES (loudly). Cursèd!

CONFESSOR. 'The Lord shall cause thee to be smitten before thine
enemies: thou shalt go out one way against them, and flee seven ways
before them, and shalt be moved into all the kingdoms of the earth. And
thy carcase shall be meat unto all fowls of the air, and unto the beasts
of the earth, and no man shall fray them away. The Lord will smite
thee with the botch of Egypt, the scab and the itch, with madness and
blindness, that thou shalt grope at noonday, as the blind gropeth in
darkness. Thou shalt not prosper in thy ways, and thou shalt be only
oppressed and spoiled evermore, and no man shall save thee. Thou shalt
betroth a wife, and another man shall lie with her: thou shalt build an
house, and thou shalt not dwell therein: thou shalt plant a vineyard,
and shalt not gather the grapes thereof. Thy sons and thy daughters
shall be given unto another people, and thine eyes fail with longing for
them; and there shall be no might in thy hand. And thou shalt find no
ease on earth, neither shall the sole of thy foot have rest: the Lord
shall give thee a trembling heart, and failing of eyes and sorrow of
mind. And thy life shall hang in doubt before thee; and thou shalt fear
day and night. In the morning thou shalt say, would God it were even!
And at even thou shalt say, would God it were morning! And because thou
servedst not the Lord thy God when thou livedst in security, thou shalt
serve him in hunger, in thirst, in nakedness and in want; and He shall
put a yoke of iron upon thy neck, until He have destroyed thee!'

OMNES. Amen!

(The CONFESSOR has read the above loudly and rapidly, without turning to
the STRANGER. All those present, except the LADY, who is working, have
been listening and have joined in the curse, though they have feigned
not to notice the STRANGER, who has remained with his back to them,
sunk in himself. The STRANGER now rises as if to go. The CONFESSOR goes
towards him.)

STRANGER. What was that?

CONFESSOR. The Book of Deuteronomy.

STRANGER. Of course. But I seem to remember blessings in it, too.

CONFESSOR. Yes, for those who keep His commandments.

STRANGER. Hm.... I can't deny that, for a moment, I felt shaken. Are
they temptations to be resisted, or warnings to be obeyed? (Pause.)
Anyhow I'm certain now that I have fever. I must go to a real doctor.

CONFESSOR. See he _is_ the right one!

STRANGER. Of course!

CONFESSOR. Who can heal 'delightful scruples of conscience'!

ABBESS. Should you need charity again, you now know where to find it.

STRANGER. No. I do not.

ABBESS (in a low voice). Then I'll tell you. In a 'rose' room, near a
certain running stream.

STRANGER. That's the truth! In a 'rose' room. Wait; how long have I been
here?

ABBESS. Three months to-day.

STRANGER. Three months! Have I been sleeping? Or where have I been?
(Looking out of the window.) It's autumn. The trees are bare; the clouds
look cold. Now it's coming back to me! Can you hear a mill grinding? The
sound of a horn? The rushing of a river? A wood whispering--and a
woman weeping? You're right. Only there can charity be found. Farewell.
(Exit.)

CONFESSOR (to the Abbess). The fool! The fool!

Curtain.


SCENE X

THE 'ROSE' ROOM

[The curtains have been taken down. The windows gape into the darkness
outside. The furniture has been covered in brown loose-covers and pulled
forward. The flowers have been taken away, and the large black stove
lit. The MOTHER is standing ironing white curtains by the light of a
single lamp. There is a knock at the door.]

MOTHER. Come in!

STRANGER (doing so). Where's my wife?

MOTHER. Where do you come from?

STRANGER. I think, from hell. But where's my wife?

MOTHER. Which of them do you mean?

STRANGER. The question's justified. Everything is, except to me.

MOTHER. There may be a reason: I'm glad you've seen it. Where have you
been?

STRANGER. Whether in a poorhouse, a madhouse or a hospital, I don't
know. I should like to think it all a feverish dream. I've been ill: I
lost my memory and can't believe three months have passed. But where's
my wife?

MOTHER. I ought to ask you that. When you deserted her, she went
away--to look for you. Whether she's tired of looking, I can't say.

STRANGER. Something's amiss here. Where's the Old Man?

MOTHER. Where there's no more suffering.

STRANGER. You mean he's dead?

MOTHER. Yes. He's dead.

STRANGER. You say it as if you wanted to add him to my victims.

MOTHER. Perhaps I'm right to do so.

STRANGER. He didn't look sensitive: he was capable of steady hatred.

MOTHER. No. He hated only what was evil, in himself and others.

STRANGER. So I'm wrong there, too! (Pause.)

MOTHER. What do you want here?

STRANGER. Charity!

MOTHER. At last! How was it at the hospital! Sit down and tell me.

STRANGER (sitting). I don't want to think of it. I don't even know if it
_was_ a hospital.

MOTHER. Strange. Tell me what happened after you left here.

STRANGER. I fell in the mountains, hurt my hip and lost consciousness.
If you'll speak kindly to me you shall know more.

MOTHER. I will.

STRANGER. When I woke I was in a red iron bedstead. Three men were
pulling a cord that ran through two blocks. Every time they pulled I
felt I grew two feet taller....

MOTHER. They were putting in your hip.

STRANGER. I hadn't thought of that. Then... I lay watching my past life
unroll before me like a panorama, through childhood, youth.... And
when the roll was finished it began again. All the time I heard a mill
grinding.... I can hear it still. Yes, here too!

MOTHER. Those were not pleasant visions.

STRANGER. No. At last I came to the conclusion... that I was a
thoroughgoing scamp.

MOTHER. Why call yourself that?

STRANGER. I know you'd like to hear me say I was a scoundrel. But that
would seem to me like boasting. It would imply a certainty about myself
to which I've not attained.

MOTHER. You're still in doubt?

STRANGER. Of a great deal. But I've begun to have an inkling.

MOTHER. That....?

STRANGER. That there are forces which, till now, I've not believed in.

MOTHER. You've come to see that neither you, nor any other man, directs
your destiny?

STRANGER. I have.

MOTHER. Then you've already gone part of the way.

STRANGER. But I myself have changed. I'm ruined; for I've lost all
aptitude for writing. And I can't sleep at night.

MOTHER. Indeed!

STRANGER. What are called nightmares stop me. Last and worst: I daren't
die; for I'm no longer sure my miseries will end, with _my_ end.

MOTHER. Oh!

STRANGER. Even worse: I've grown so to loathe myself that I'd escape
from myself, if I knew how. If I were a Christian, I couldn't obey the
first commandment, to love my neighbour as myself, for I should have
to hate him as I hate myself. It's true that I'm a scamp. I've always
suspected it; and because I never wanted life to fool me, I've observed
'others' carefully. When I saw they were no better than I, I resented
their trying to browbeat me.

MOTHER. You've been wrong to think it a matter between you and others.
You have to deal with Him.

STRANGER. With whom?

MOTHER. The Invisible One, who guides your destiny.

STRANGER. Would I could see Him.

MOTHER. It would be your death.

STRANGER. Oh no!

MOTHER. Where do you get this devilish spirit of rebellion? If you won't
bow your neck like the rest, you must be broken like a reed.

STRANGER. I don't know where this fearful stubbornness comes from. It's
true an unpaid bill can make me tremble; but if I were to climb Mount
Sinai and face the Eternal One, I should not cover my face.

MOTHER. Jesus and Mary! Don't say such things. You'll make me think
you're a child of the Devil.

STRANGER. Here that seems the general opinion. But I've heard that those
who serve the Evil One get honours, goods and gold as their reward. Gold
especially. Do you think me suspect?

MOTHER. You'll bring a curse on my house.

STRANGER. Then I'll leave it.

MOTHER. And go into the night. Where?

STRANGER. To seek the only one that I don't hate.

MOTHER. Are you sure she'll receive you?

STRANGER. Quite sure.

MOTHER. I'm not.

STRANGER. I am.

MOTHER. Then I must raise your doubts.

STRANGER. You can't.

MOTHER. Yes, I can.

STRANGER. It's a lie.

MOTHER. We're no longer speaking kindly. We must stop. Can you sleep in
the attic?

STRANGER. I can't sleep anywhere.

MOTHER. Still, I'll say good-night to you, whether you think I mean it,
or not.

STRANGER. You're sure there are no rats in the attic? I don't fear
ghosts, but rats aren't pleasant.

MOTHER. I'm glad you don't fear ghosts, for no one's slept a whole night
there... whatever the cause may be.

STRANGER (after a moment's hesitation). Never have I met a more wicked
woman than you. The reason is: you have religion.

MOTHER. Good-night!

Curtain.


SCENE XI

IN THE KITCHEN

[It is dark, but the moon outside throws moving shadows of the window
lattices on to the floor, as the storm clouds race by. In the corner,
right, under the crucifix, where the OLD MAN used to sit, a hunting
horn, a gun and a game bag hang on the wall. On the table a stuffed bird
of prey. As the windows are open the curtains are flapping in the wind;
and kitchen cloths, aprons and towels, that are hung on a line by the
hearth, move in the wind, whose sighing can be heard. In the distance
the noise of a waterfall. There is an occasional tapping on the wooden
floor.]

STRANGER (entering, half-dressed, a lamp in his hand). Is anyone here?
No. (He comes forward with a light, which makes the play of shadow less
marked.) What's moving on the floor? Is anyone here? (He goes to the
table, sees the stuffed bird and stands riveted to the spot.) God!

MOTHER (coming in with a lamp). Still up?

STRANGER. I couldn't sleep.

MOTHER (gently). Why not, my son?

STRANGER. I heard someone above me.

MOTHER. Impossible. There's nothing over the attic.

STRANGER. That's why I was uneasy! What's moving on the floor like
snakes?

MOTHER. Moonbeams.

STRANGER. Yes. Moonbeams. That's a stuffed bird. And those are cloths.
Everything's natural; that's what makes me uneasy. Who was knocking
during the night? Was anyone locked out?

MOTHER. It was a horse in the stable.

STRANGER. Why should it make that noise?

MOTHER. Some animals have nightmares.

STRANGER. What are nightmares?

MOTHER. Who knows?

STRANGER. May I sit down?

MOTHER. Do. I want to speak seriously to you. I was malicious last
night; you must forgive me. It's because of that I need religion; just
as I need the penitential garment and the stone floor. To spare you,
I'll tell you what nightmares are to me. My bad conscience! Whether
I punish myself or another punishes me, I don't know. I don't permit
myself to ask. (Pause.) Now tell me what you saw in your room.

STRANGER. I hardly know. Nothing. When I went in I felt as if someone
were there. Then I went to bed. But someone started pacing up and down
above me with a heavy tread. Do you believe in ghosts?

MOTHER. My religion won't allow me to. But I believe our sense of right
and wrong will find a way to punish us.

STRANGER. Soon I felt cold air on my breast--it reached my heart and
forced me to get up.

MOTHER. And then?

STRANGER. To stand and watch the whole panorama of my life unroll before
me. I saw everything--that was the worst of it.

MOTHER. I know. I've been through it. There's no name for the malady,
and only one cure.

STRANGER. What is it?

MOTHER. You know what children do when they've done wrong?

STRANGER. What?

MOTHER. First ask forgiveness!

STRANGER. And then?

MOTHER. Try to make amends.

STRANGER. Isn't it enough to suffer according to one's deserts?

MOTHER. No. That's revenge.

STRANGER. Then what must one do?

MOTHER. Can you mend a life you've destroyed? Undo a bad action?

STRANGER. Truly, no. But I was forced into it! Forced to take, for no
one gave me the right. Accursèd be He who forced me! (Putting his hand
to his heart.) Ah! He's here, in this room. He's plucking out my heart!

MOTHER. Then bow your head.

STRANGER. I cannot.

MOTHER. Down on your knees.

STRANGER. I will not.

MOTHER. Christ have mercy! Lord have mercy on you! On your knees before
Him who was crucified! Only He can wipe out what's been done.

STRANGER. Not before Him! If I were forced, I'll recant... afterwards.

MOTHER. On your knees, my son!

STRANGER. I cannot bow the knee. I cannot. Help me, God Eternal.
(Pause.)

MOTHER (after a hasty prayer). Do you feel better?

STRANGER. Yes.... It was not death. It was annihilation!

MOTHER. The annihilation of the Divine. We call it spiritual death.

STRANGER. I see. (Without irony.) I begin to understand.

MOTHER. My son! You have left Jerusalem and are on the road to Damascus.
Go back the same way you came. Erect a cross at every station, and stay
at the seventh. For you, there are not fourteen, as for Him.

STRANGER. You speak in riddles.

MOTHER. Then go your way. Search out those to whom you have something to
say. First, your wife.

STRANGER. Where is she?

MOTHER. You must find her. On your way don't forget to call on him you
named the werewolf.

STRANGER. Never!

MOTHER. You'd have said that, as you came here. As you know, I expected
your coming.

STRANGER. Why?

MOTHER. For no one reason.

STRANGER. Just as I saw this kitchen... in a trance....

MOTHER. That's why I now regret trying to separate you and Ingeborg. Go
and search for her. If you find her, well and good. If not, perhaps that
too has been ordained. (Pause.) Dawn's now at hand. Morning has come and
the night has passed.

STRANGER. Such a night!

MOTHER. You'll remember it.

STRANGER. Not all of it... yet something.

MOTHER (looking out of the window, as if to herself). Lovely morning
star--how far from heaven have you fallen!

STRANGER (after a pause). Have you noticed that, before the sun rises, a
feeling of awe takes hold of mankind? Are we children of darkness, that
we tremble before the light?

MOTHER. Will you never be tired of questioning?

STRANGER. Never. Because I yearn for light.

MOTHER. Go then, and search. And peace be with you!


SCENE XII

IN THE RAVINE

[The same landscape as before, but in autumn colouring. The trees have
lost their leaves. Work is going on at the smithy and the mill. The
SMITH stands, left, in the doorway; the MILLER'S wife, right. The
LADY dressed in a jacket with a hat of patent leather; but she is in
mourning. The STRANGER is in Bavarian alpine kit: short jacket of
rough material, knickers, heavy boots and alpenstock, green hat with
heath-cock feather. Over this he wears a brown cloak with a cape and
hood.]

LADY (entering tired and dispirited). Did a man pass here in a long
cloak, with a green hat? (The SMITH and the MILLER'S WIFE shake their
heads.) Can I lodge here for the night? (The SMITH and the MILLER'S WIFE
again shake their heads: to the SMITH.) May I stand in the doorway for
a moment and warm myself? (The SMITH pushes her away.) God reward you
according to your deserts!

(Exit. She reappears on the footbridge, and exit once more.)

STRANGER (entering). Has a lady in a coat and skirt crossed the brook?
(The SMITH and MILLER'S WIFE shake their heads.) Will you give me
some bread? I'll pay for it. (The MILLER'S WIFE refuses the money.) No
charity!

ECHO (imitating his voice from afar). Charity.

(The SMITH and the MILLER'S WIFE laugh so loudly and so long that, at
length, ECHO replies.)

STRANGER. Good! An eye for an eye--a tooth for a tooth. It helps to
lighten my conscience! (He enters the ravine.)


SCENE XIII

ON THE ROAD

[The same landscape as before; but autumn. The BEGGAR is sitting outside
a chapel with a lime twig and a bird cage, in which is a starling. The
STRANGER enters wearing the same clothes as in the preceding scene.]

STRANGER. Beggar! Have you seen a lady in a coat and skirt pass this
way?

BEGGAR. I've seen five hundred. But, seriously, I must ask you not to
call me beggar now. I've found work!

STRANGER. Oh! So it's you!

BEGGAR. Ille ego qui quondam....

STRANGER. What kind of work have you?

BEGGAR. I've a starling, that whistles and sings.

STRANGER. You mean, _he_ does the work?

BEGGAR. Yes. I'm my own master now.

STRANGER. Do you catch birds?

BEGGAR. No. The lime twig's merely for appearances.

STRANGER. So you still cling to such things?

BEGGAR. What else should I cling to? What's within us is nothing but
pure... nonsense.

STRANGER. Is that the final conclusion of your whole philosophy of life?

BEGGAR. My complete metaphysic. The view mad be rather out of date,
but...

STRANGER. Can you be serious for a moment? Tell me about your past.

BEGGAR. Why unravel that old skein? Twist it up rather. Twist it up. Do
you think I'm always so merry? Only when I meet you: you're so damnably
funny!

STRANGER. How can you laugh, with a wrecked life behind you?

BEGGAR. Now he's getting personal! (Pause.) If you can't laugh at
adversity, not even that of others, you're begging of life itself.
Listen! If you follow this wheel track you'll come, at last, to the
ocean, and there the path will stop. If you sit down there and rest,
you'll begin to take another view of things. Here there are so many
accidents, religious themes, disagreeable memories that hinder thought
as it flies to the 'rose' room. Only follow the track! If it's
muddy here and there, spread your wings and flutter. And talking of
fluttering: I once heard a bird that sang of Polycrates and his ring;
how he'd become possessed of all the marvels of this world, but didn't
know what to do with them. So he sent tidings east and west of the
great Nothing he'd helped to fashion from the empty universe. I wouldn't
assert you were the man, unless I believed it so firmly I could take my
oath on it. Once I asked you whether you knew who I was, and you said
it didn't interest you. In return I offered you my friendship, but you
refused it rudely. However, I'm not sensitive or resentful, so I'll give
you good advice on your way. Follow the track!

STRANGER (avoiding him). You don't deceive me.

BEGGAR. You believe nothing but evil. That's why you get nothing but
evil. Try to believe what is good. Try!

STRANGER. I will. But if I'm deceived, I've the right to....

BEGGAR. You've no right to do that.

STRANGER (as if to himself ). Who is it reads my secret thoughts, turns
my soul inside out, and pursues me? Why do you persecute me?

BEGGAR. Saul! Saul! Why persecutest thou Me?

(The STRANGER goes out with a gesture of horror. The chord of the
funeral march is heard again. The LADY enters.)

LADY. Have you seen a man pass this way in a long cloak, with a green
hat?

BEGGAR. There was a poor devil here, who hobbled off....

LADY. The man I'm searching for's not lame.

BEGGAR. Nor was he. It seems he'd hurt his hip; and that made him walk
unsteadily. I mustn't be malicious. Look here in the mud.

LADY. Where?

BEGGAR (pointing). There! At that rut. In it you can see the impression
of a boot, firmly planted....

LADY (looking at the impression). It's he! His heavy tread.... Can I
catch him up?

BEGGAR. Follow the track!

LADY (taking his hand and kissing it). Thank you, my friend. (Exit.)


SCENE XIV

BY THE SEA

[The same landscape as before, but now winter. The sea is dark blue,
and on the horizon great clouds take on the shapes of huge heads. In the
distance three bare masts of a wrecked ship, that look like three white
crosses. The table and seat are still under the tree, but the chairs
have been removed. There is snow on the ground. From time to time a
bell-buoy can be heard. The STRANGER comes in from the left, stops a
moment and looks out to sea, then goes out, right, behind the cottage.
The LADY enters, left, and appears to be following the STRANGER'S
footsteps on the snow; she exits in front of the cottage, right. The
STRANGER re-enters, right, notices the footprints of the LADY, pauses,
and looks back, right. The LADY re-enters, throws herself into his arms,
but recoils.]

LADY. You thrust me away.

STRANGER. No. It seems there's someone between us.

LADY. Indeed there is! (Pause.) What a meeting!

STRANGER. Yes. It's winter; as you see.

LADY. I can feel the cold coming from you.

STRANGER. I got frozen in the mountains.

LADY. Do you think the spring will ever come?

STRANGER. Not to us! We've been driven from the garden, and must wander
over stones and thistles. And when our hands and feet are bruised, we
feel we must rub salt in the wounds of the... other one. And then the
mill starts grinding. It'll never stop; for there's always water.

LADY. No doubt what you say is true.

STRANGER. But I'll not yield to the inevitable. Rather than that we
should lacerate each other I'll gash myself as a sacrifice to the gods.
I'll take the blame upon me; declare it was I who taught you to break
your chains. I who tempted you! Then you can lay all the blame on me:
for what I did, and what happened after.

LADY. You couldn't bear it.

STRANGER. Yes, I could. There are moments when I feel as if I bore all
the sin and sorrow, all the filth and shame of the whole world. There
are moments when I believe we are condemned to sin and do bad actions
as a punishment! (Pause.) Not long ago I lay sick of a fever, and amidst
all that happened to me, I dreamed that I saw a crucifix without the
Crucified. And when I asked the Dominican--for there was a Dominican
among many others--what it could mean, he said: 'You will not allow Him
to suffer for you. Suffer then yourself!' That's why mankind have grown
so conscious of their own sufferings.

LADY. And why consciences grow so heavy, if there's no one to help to
bear the burden.

STRANGER. Have you also come to think so?

LADY. Not yet. But I'm on the way.

STRANGER. Put your hand in mine. From here let us go on together.

LADY. Where?

STRANGER. Back! The same way we came. Are you weary?

LADY. Now no longer.

STRANGER. Several times I sank exhausted. But I met a strange
beggar--perhaps you remember him: he was thought to be like me. And
he begged me, as an experiment, to believe his good intentions. I did
believe--as an experiment--and....

LADY. Well?

STRANGER. It went well with me. And since then I feel I've strength to
go on my way....

LADY. Let's go together!

STRANGER (turning to the sea). Yes. It's growing dark and the clouds are
gathering.

LADY. Don't look at the clouds.

STRANGER. And below there? What's that?

LADY. Only a wreck.

STRANGER (whispering). Three crosses! What new Golgotha awaits us?

LADY. They're white ones. That means good fortune.

STRANGER. Can good fortune ever come to us?

LADY. Yes. But not yet.

STRANGER. Let's go!


SCENE XV

ROOM IN AN HOTEL

[The room is as before. The LADY is sitting by the side of the STRANGER,
crocheting.]

LADY. Do say something.

STRANGER. I've nothing but unpleasant things to say, since we came here.

LADY. Why were you so anxious to have this terrible room?

STRANGER. I don't know. It was the last one I wanted. I began to long
for it, in order to suffer.

LADY. And are you suffering?

STRANGER. Yes. I can no longer listen to singing, or look at anything
beautiful. During the day I hear the mill and see that great panorama
now expanding to embrace the universe.... And, at night...

LADY. Why did you cry out in your sleep?

STRANGER. I was dreaming.

LADY. A real dream?

STRANGER. Terribly real. But you see what a curse is on me. I feel I
must describe it, and to no one else but you. Yet I daren't tell you,
for it would be rattling at the door of the locked chamber....

LADY. The past!

STRANGER. Yes.

LADY (simply). It's foolish to have any such secret place.

STRANGER. Yes. (Pause.)

LADY. And now tell me!

STRANGER. I'm afraid I must. I dreamed your first husband was married to
my first wife.

LADY. Only you could have thought of such a thing!

STRANGER. I wish it were so. (Pause.) I saw how he ill-treated my
children. (Getting up.) I put my hands to his throat.... I can't go
on.... But I shall never rest till I know the truth. And to know it, I
must go to him in his own house.

LADY. It's come to that?

STRANGER. It's been coming for some time. Nothing can now prevent it. I
must see him.

LADY. But if he won't receive you?

STRANGER. I'll go as a patient, and tell him of my sickness....

LADY (frightened). Don't do that!

STRANGER. You think he might be tempted to shut me up as mad! I must
risk it. I want to risk everything--life, freedom, welfare. I need an
emotional shock, strong enough to bring myself into the light of day. I
demand this torture, that my punishment may be in just proportion to my
sin, so that I shall not be forced to drag myself along under the burden
of my guilt. So down into the snake pit, as soon as may be!

LADY. Could I come with you?

STRANGER. There's no need. My sufferings will be enough for both.

LADY. Then I'll call you my deliverer. And the curse I once laid on you
will turn into a blessing. Look! It's spring once more.

STRANGER. So I see. The Christmas rose there has begun to wither.

LADY. But don't you feel spring in the air?

STRANGER. The cold within isn't so great.

LADY. Perhaps the werewolf will heal you altogether.

STRANGER. We shall see. Perhaps he's not so dangerous, after all.

LADY. He's not so cruel as you.

STRANGER. But my dream....

LADY. Let's hope it was only a dream. Now my wool's finished; and with
it, my useless work. It's grown soiled in the making.

STRANGER. It can be washed.

LADY. Or dyed.

STRANGER. Rose red.

LADY. Never!

STRANGER. It's like a roll of manuscript.

LADY. With our story on it.

STRANGER. In the filth of the roads, in tears and in blood.

LADY. But the story's nearly done. Go and write the last chapter.

STRANGER. Then we'll meet at the seventh station. Where we began!


SCENE XVI

THE DOCTOR'S HOUSE

[The scene is more or less as before. But half the wood-pile has been
taken away. On a seat near the verandah surgical instruments, knives,
saws, forceps, etc. The DOCTOR is engaged in cleaning these.]

SISTER (coming from the verandah). A patient to see you.

DOCTOR. Do you know who it is?

SISTER. I've not seen him. Here's his card.

DOCTOR (reading it). This outdoes everything!

SISTER. Is it he?

DOCTOR. Yes. Courage I respect; but this is cynicism. A kind of
challenge. Still, let him come in.

SISTER. Are you serious?

DOCTOR. Perfectly. But, if you care to talk to him a little, in that
straightforward way of yours....

SISTER. I'd like to.

DOCTOR. Very well. Do the heavy work, and leave the final polish to me.

SISTER. You can trust me. I'll tell him everything your kindness forbids
you to say.

DOCTOR. Enough of my kindness! Make haste, or I'll get impatient. Shut
the doors. (His SISTER goes out.) What are you doing at that dustbin,
Caesar? (CAESAR comes in.) Listen, Caesar, if your enemy were to come
and lay his head in your lap, what would you do?

CAESAR. Cut it off!

DOCTOR. That's not what I've taught you.

CAESAR. No; you said, heap coals of fire on it. But I think that's a
shame.

DOCTOR. I think so, too; it's more cruel and more cunning. (Pause.)
Isn't it better to take some revenge? It heartens the other person,
lifts the burden off him.

CAESAR. As you know more about it than I, why ask?

DOCTOR. Quiet! I'm not speaking to you. (Pause.) Very well. First cut
off his head, and then.... We'll see.

CAESAR. It all depends on how he behaves.

DOCTOR. Yes. On how he behaves. Quiet. Get along.

(The STRANGER comes from the verandah: he seems excited but his manner
betrays a certain resignation. CAESAR has gone out.)

STRANGER. You're surprised to see me here?

DOCTOR (seriously). I've long given up being surprised. But I see I must
begin again.

STRANGER. Will you permit me to speak to you?

DOCTOR. About anything decent people may discuss. Are you ill?

STRANGER (hesitating). Yes.

DOCTOR. Why did you come to me--of all people?

STRANGER. You must guess!

DOCTOR. I refuse to. (Pause.) What do you complain of?

STRANGER (with uncertainty). Sleeplessness.

DOCTOR. That's not a disease, but a symptom. Have you already seen a
doctor?

STRANGER. I've been lying ill in an... institution. I was feverish. I've
a strange malady.

DOCTOR. What was so strange about it?

STRANGER. May I ask this? Can one go about as usual; and yet be
delirious?

DOCTOR. If you're mad; not otherwise. (The STRANGER lets up, but then
sits down again.) What was the hospital called?

STRANGER. St. Saviour.

DOCTOR. That's not a hospital.

STRANGER. A convent, then.

DOCTOR. No. It's an asylum. (The STRANGER gets up, the DOCTOR does so,
too, and calls.) Sister! Shut the front door. And the gate leading to
the road. (To the STRANGER.) Won't you sit down? I have to keep the
doors here locked. There are so many tramps.

STRANGER (calms himself). Be frank with me: do you think me... insane?

DOCTOR. No one ever gets a frank answer to that question, as you know.
And no one who suffers in that way ever believes what he's told. So my
opinion must be a matter of indifference to you. (Pause.) But if it's
your soul, go to a spiritual healer.

STRANGER. Could you take his place for a moment?

DOCTOR. I haven't the vocation.

STRANGER. But...

DOCTOR (interrupting). Or the time. We're getting ready for a wedding
here!

STRANGER. I dreamed it!

DOCTOR. It may ease your mind to know that I've consoled myself, as it's
called. You may be pleased, it would be natural... but I see, on the
contrary, it makes you suffer more. There must be a reason. Why, should
you be upset at my marrying a widow?

STRANGER. With two children?

DOCTOR. Two children! Now we have it! A damnable supposition worthy of
you. If there were a hell, you should be hell's overseer, for your skill
in finding means of punishment exceeds my wildest inventions. Yet I'm
called a werewolf!

STRANGER. It might happen that...

DOCTOR (cutting him short). For a long time, I hated you, because by
an unforgiveable action you cheated me of my good name. But when I grew
older and wiser I saw that, although the punishment wasn't earned, I
deserved it for other things that had never been discovered. Besides,
you were a boy with enough conscience to be able to punish yourself. So
you need worry no more about the whole thing. Is that what you wanted to
speak of?

STRANGER. Yes.

DOCTOR. Then you'll be content, if I let you go? (The STRANGER is about
to ask a question.) Did you think I'd shut you up? Or cut you in pieces
with those instruments? Kill you? 'Perhaps such poor devils ought to
be put out of their misery!' (The STRANGER looks at his watch.) You can
still catch the boat.

STRANGER. Will you give me your hand?

DOCTOR. Impossible. And what is the use of my forgiving you, if you lack
the strength to forgive yourself? (Pause.) Some things can only be cured
by making them undone. So this never can be.

STRANGER. St. Saviour...

DOCTOR. Helped you. You challenged destiny and were broken. There's no
shame in losing such a fight. I did the same; but, as you see, I've got
rid of my woodpile. I want no thunder in my home. And I shall play no
more with the lightning.

STRANGER. One station more, and I shall reach my goal.

DOCTOR. You'll never reach your goal. Farewell!

STRANGER. Farewell!


SCENE XVII

A STREET CORNER

[The same as Scene I. The STRANGER is sitting on the seat beneath the
tree, drawing in the sand.]

LADY (entering). What are you doing?

STRANGER. Writing in the sand... still.

LADY. Can you hear singing?

STRANGER (pointing to the church). Yes. But from there! I've been unjust
to someone, unwittingly.

LADY. I think our wanderings must be over, now we've come back here.

STRANGER. Where we began... at the street corner, between the inn,
the church and the post office. By the way... isn't there a registered
letter for me there, that I never fetched?

LADY. Yes. Because there was nothing but unpleasantness in it.

STRANGER. Or legal matters. (Striking his forehead.) Then that's the
explanation.

LADY. Fetch it then. In the belief that what it contains is good.

STRANGER (ironically). Good!

LADY. Believe it. Imagine it!

STRANGER (going to the post office). I'll make the attempt.

(The LADY waits on the pavement. The STRANGER comes back with a letter.)

LADY. Well?

STRANGER. I feel ashamed of myself. It's the money.

LADY. You see! All these sufferings, all these tears... in vain!

STRANGER. Not in vain! It looks like spite, what happens here, but it's
not that. I wronged the Invisible when I mistook...

LADY. Enough! No accusations.

STRANGER. No. It was my own stupidity or wickedness. I didn't want to be
made a fool of by life. That's why I was! It was the elves...

LADY. Who made the change in you. Come. Let's go.

STRANGER. And hide ourselves and our misery in the mountains.

LADY. Yes. The mountains will hide us! (Pause.) But first I must go and
light a candle to my good Saint Elizabeth. Come. (The STRANGER shakes
his head.) Come!

STRANGER. Very well. I'll go through that way. But I can't stay.

LADY. How can you tell? Come. In there you shall hear new songs.

(The STRANGER follows her to the door of the church.)

STRANGER. It may be!

LADY. Come!

THE END.




PART II



CHARACTERS

     THE STRANGER
     THE LADY
     THE MOTHER
     THE FATHER
     THE CONFESSOR
     THE DOCTOR
     CAESAR

     less important figures
     MAID
     PROFESSOR
     RAGGED PERSON
     ANOTHER RAGGED PERSON
     FIRST WOMAN
     SECOND WOMAN
     WAITRESS
     POLICEMAN


SCENES

     ACT I  Outside the House

     ACT II  SCENE I   Laboratory
             SCENE II  The 'Rose' Room

     ACT III SCENE I   The Banqueting Hall
             SCENE II  A Prison Cell
             SCENE III The 'Rose' Room

     ACT IV  SCENE I   The Banqueting Hall
             SCENE II  In a Ravine
             SCENE III The 'Rose' Room




ACT I

OUTSIDE THE HOUSE

[On the right a terrace, on which the house stands. Below it a road runs
towards the back, where there is a thick pine wood with heights beyond,
whose outlines intersect. On the left there is a suggestion of a river
bank, but the river itself cannot be seen. The house is white and has
small, mullioned windows with iron bars. On the wall vines and climbing
roses. In front of the house, on the terrace, a well; at the end of the
terrace pumpkin plants, whose large yellow flowers hang dozen over the
edge. Fruit trees are planted along the road, and a memorial cross can
be seen erected at a spot where an accident occurred. Steps lead
down from the terrace to the road, and there are flower-pots on the
balustrade. In front of the steps there is a seat. The road reaches the
foreground from the right, curving past the terrace, which projects like
a promontory, and then loses itself in the background. Strong sunlight
from the left. The MOTHER is sitting on the seat below the steps. The
DOMINICAN is standing in front of her.]

DOMINICAN [Note: The same character as the CONFESSOR and BEGGAR.]. You
called me to discuss a family matter of importance to you. Tell me what
it is.

MOTHER. Father, life has treated me hardly. I don't know what I've done
to be so frowned upon by Providence.

DOMINICAN. It's a mark of favour to be tried by the Eternal One, and
triumph awaits the steadfast.

MOTHER. That's what I've often said to myself; but there are limits to
the suffering one can bear....

DOMINICAN. There are no limits. Suff'ering's as boundless as grace.

MOTHER. First my husband leaves me for another woman.

DOMINICAN. Then let him go. He'll come crawling back again on his bare
knees!

MOTHER. And as you know, Father, my only daughter was married to
a doctor. But she left him and came home with a stranger, whom she
presented to me as her new husband.

DOMINICAN. That's not easy to understand. Divorce isn't recognised by
our religion.

MOTHER. No. But they'd crossed the frontier, to a land where there are
other laws. He's an Old Catholic, and he found a priest to marry them.

DOMINICAN. That's no real marriage, and can't be dissolved because it
never existed. But it can be nullified. Who is your present son-in-law?

MOTHER. Truly, I wish I knew! One thing I do know, and that's enough to
fill my cup of sorrow. He's been divorced and his wife and children live
in wretched circumstances.

DOMINICAN. A difficult case. But we'll find a way to put it right. What
does he do?

MOTHER. He's a writer; said to be famous at home.

DOMINICAN. Godless, too, I suppose?

MOTHER. Yes. At least he used to be; but since his second marriage he's
not known a happy hour. Fate, as he calls it, seized him with an iron
hand and drove him here in the shape of a ragged beggar. Ill-fortune
struck him blow after blow, so that I pitied him at the very moment he
fled from here. Then he wandered in the woods and, later, lay out in the
fields where he fell, till he was found by merciful folk and taken to a
convent. There he lay ill for three months, without our knowing where he
was.

DOMINICAN. Wait! Last year a man was brought to the Convent of St.
Saviour, where I'm Confessor, under the circumstances you describe.
Whilst he was feverish he opened his heart to me, and there was scarcely
a sin of which he didn't confess his guilt. But when he came to himself
again, he said he remembered nothing. So to prove him in heart and reins
I used the secret apostolic powers that are given us; and, as a trial,
employed the lesser curse. For when a crime's been done in secret, the
curse of Deuteronomy is read over the suspected man. If he's innocent,
he goes his way unscathed. But if he's struck by it, then, as Paul
relates, 'he is delivered unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh,
that his spirit may be saved.'

MOTHER. O God! It must be he!

DOMINICAN. Yes, it is he. Your son-in-law! The ways of Providence are
inscrutable. Was he heavily struck by the curse?

MOTHER. Yes. That night he slept here, and was torn from his sleep by an
unexplained power that, as he told me, turned his heart to ice....

DOMINICAN. Did he have fearful visions?

MOTHER. Yes.

DOMINICAN. And was he harried by those terrible thoughts, of which Job
says, 'When I say, my bed shall comfort me, then Thou scarest me
with dreams and terrifiest me with visions; so that my soul chooseth
strangling, and death rather than life.' That's as it should be. Did it
open his eyes?

MOTHER. Yes. But only so that his sight was blinded. For his sufferings
grew so great that he could no longer find a natural explanation for
them, and as no doctor could cure him, he began to see that he was
fighting higher conscious powers.

DOMINICAN. Powers that meant him ill, and were therefore themselves
evil. That's the usual course of things. And then?

MOTHER. He came upon books that taught him that such evil powers could
be fought.

DOMINICAN. Oh! So he looked for what's hidden, and should remain so! Did
he succeed in exorcising the spirits that chastised him?

MOTHER. He says he did. And it seems now that he can sleep again.

DOMINICAN. Yes, and he believes what he says. Yet, since he hasn't truly
accepted the love of truth, God will trouble him with great delusion, so
that he'll believe what is false.

MOTHER. The fault's his own. But he's changed my daughter: in other days
she was neither hot nor cold; but now she's on the way to becoming evil.

DOMINICAN. How do the two of them get on?

MOTHER. Half the time, happily; the other half they plague one another
like devils.

DOMINICAN. That's the way they must go. Plague one another till they
come to the Cross.

MOTHER. If they don't part again.

DOMINICAN. What? Have they done so?

MOTHER. They've left one another four times, but have always come back.
It seems as if they're chained together. It would be a good thing if
they were, for a child's on the way.

DOMINICAN. Let the child come. Children bring gifts that are refreshing
to tired souls.

MOTHER. I hope it may be so. But it looks as if this one will be an
apple of discord. They're already quarrelling over its name; they're
quarrelling over its baptism; and the mother's already jealous of her
husband's children by his first wife. He can't promise to love this
child as much as the others, and the mother absolutely insists that he
shall! So there's no end to their miseries.

DOMINICAN. Oh yes, there is. Wait! He's had dealings with higher powers,
so that we've gained a hold on him; and our prayers will be more,
powerful than his resistance. Their effect is as extraordinary as it
is mysterious. (The STRANGER appears on the terrace. He is in hunting
costume and wears a tropical helmet. In his hand he has an alpenstock.)
Is that him, up there?

MOTHER. Yes. That's my present son-in-law.

DOMINICAN. Singularly like the first! But watch how he's behaving. He
hasn't seen me yet, but he feels I'm here. (He makes the sign of the
cross in the air.) Look how troubled he grows.... Now he stiffens like
an icicle. See! In a moment he'll cry out.

STRANGER (who has suddenly stopped, grown rigid, and clutched his
heart). Who's down there?

MOTHER. I am.

STRANGER. You're not alone.

MOTHER. No. I've someone with me.

DOMINICAN (making the sign of the cross). Now he'll say nothing; but
fall like a felled tree. (The STRANGER crumples up and falls to the
ground.) Now I shall go. It would be too much for him if he were to see
me, But I'll come back soon. You'll see, he's in good hands! Farewell
and peace be with you. (He goes out.)

STRANGER (raising himself and coming down the steps). Who was that?

MOTHER. A traveller. Sit down; you look so pale.

STRANGER. It was a fainting fit.

MOTHER. You've always new names for it; but they mean nothing fresh. Sit
down here, on the seat.

STRANGER. No; I don't like sitting there. People are always passing.

MOTHER. Yet I've been sitting here since I was a child, watching life
glide past as the river does below. Here, on the road, I've watched the
children of men go by, playing, haggling, begging, cursing and dancing.
I love this seat and I love the river below, though it does much damage
every year and washes away the property we inherited. Last spring it
carried our whole hay crop off, so that we had to sell our beasts. The
property's lost half its value in the last few years, and when the lake
in the mountains has reached its new level and the swamp's been drained
into the river, the water will rise till it washes the house away. We've
been at law about it for ten years, and we've lost every appeal; so we
shall be destroyed. It's as inevitable as fate.

STRANGER. Fate's not inevitable.

MOTHER. Beware, if you think to fight it.

STRANGER. I've done so already.

MOTHER. There you go again! You learn nothing from the chastisement of
Providence.

STRANGER. Oh yes. I've learned to hate. Can one love what does evil?

MOTHER. I've little learning, as you know; but I read yesterday in an
encyclopaedia that the Eumenides are not evilly disposed.

STRANGER. That's true; but it's a lie they're friendly. I only know one
friendly fury. My own!

MOTHER. Can you call Ingeborg a fury?

STRANGER. Yes. She is one; and as a fury, she's remarkable. Her talent
for making me suffer excels my most infernal inventions; and if I escape
from her hands with my life, I'll come out of the fire as pure as gold.

MOTHER. You've got what you deserve. You wanted to mould her as you
wished, and you've succeeded.

STRANGER. Completely. But where is this fury?

MOTHER. She went down the road a few minutes ago.

STRANGER. Down there? Then I'll go to meet my own destruction. (He goes
towards the back.)

MOTHER. So you can still joke about it? Wait! (The MOTHER is left alone
for a moment, until the STRANGER has disappeared. The LADY then enters
from the right. She is wearing a summer frock, and is carrying a post
bag and some opened letters in her hand.)

LADY. Are you alone, Mother?

MOTHER. I've just been left alone.

LADY. Here's the post. This is for job.

MOTHER. What? Do you open his letters?

LADY. All of them, because I want to know who it is I've linked my life
to. And I want to suppress everything that might minister to his pride.
In a word, I isolate him, so that he has to keep his own electricity and
run the danger of being broken to pieces.

MOTHER. How learnèd you've grown?

LADY. Yes. If he's unwise enough to confide almost everything to me,
I'll soon hold his fate in my hand. Now, if you please, he's making
electrical experiments and claims he'll be able to harness the
lightning, so that it'll give him light, warmth and power. Well, let
him do as he likes! From a letter that came to-day I see he's even
corresponding with alchemists.

MOTHER. Does he want to make gold? Is the man sane?

LADY. That's the important question. Whether he's a charlatan doesn't
matter so much.

MOTHER. Do you suspect it?

LADY. I'd believe any evil of him, and any good, on the same day.

MOTHER. Is there any other news?

LADY. The plans my divorced husband made for a new marriage have gone
wrong; he's grown melancholic, abandoned his practice and is tramping
the roads.

MOTHER. Oh! He was always my son-in-law. He had a kind heart under his
rough manner.

LADY. Yes. I only called him a werewolf in his rôle as my husband
and master. As long as I knew he was at peace, and on the way to
find consolation, Ì was content. But now he'll torment me like a bad
conscience.

MOTHER. Have you a conscience?

LADY. I never used to have one. But my eyes have been opened since I
read my husband's works, and I know the difference between good and
evil.

MOTHER. But he forbade you to read them, and never foresaw you wouldn't
obey him.

LADY. Who can foresee all the results of any action?

MOTHER. Have you more bad news in your pocket, Pandora?

LADY. The worst of all! Think of it, Mother, his divorced wife's going
to marry again.

MOTHER. That ought to be reassuring, to you and to him.

LADY. Didn't you know it was his worst nightmare? That his wife would
marry again and his children have a stepfather?

MOTHER. If he can bear that alone, I shall think him a strange man.

LADY. You believe he's too sensitive? But didn't he say himself that
an educated man of the world at the end of the nineteenth century never
lets himself be put out of countenance!

MOTHER. It's easy to say so; but when things really happen....

LADY. Yet there was a gift at the bottom of Pandora's box that was no
misfortune. Look, Mother! A portrait of his six-year-old son.

MOTHER (looking at the picture). A lovely child.

LADY. It does one good to see such a charming and expressive picture.
Tell me, do you think my child will be as beautiful? Well, what do you
say? Answer, or I'll be unhappy! I love this boy already, but I feel I'd
hate him if my child's not as lovely as he. Yes, I'm jealous already.

MOTHER. When you came here after your unlucky honeymoon, I'd hoped you'd
have got over the worst. But now I see it was only a foretaste of what
was to come.

LADY. I'm ready for anything; and I don't think this knot can ever be
undone. It must be cut!

MOTHER. But you're only making more difficulties for yourself by
suppressing his letters.

LADY. In days gone by, when I went through life like a sleep-walker,
everything seemed easy to me, but I begin to be uncertain now he's
started to waken thoughts in me. (She puts the letters into the
post-bag.) Here he is. 'Sh!

MOTHER. One thing more. Why do you let him wear that suit of your first
husband's?

LADY. I like torturing and humiliating him. I've persuaded him it fits
him and belonged to my father. Now, when I see him in the werewolf's
things, I feel I've got both of them in my clutches.

MOTHER. Heaven defend us! How spiteful you've grown!

LADY. Perhaps that was my rôle, if I have one in this man's life!

MOTHER. I sometimes wish the river would rise and carry us all away
whilst we're asleep at night. If it were to flow here for a thousand
years perhaps it would wash out the sin on which this house is built.

LADY. Then it's true that my grandfather, the notary, illegally seized
property not his own? It's said this place was built with the heritage
of widows and orphans, the funds of ruined men, the property of dead
ones and the bribes of litigants.

MOTHER. Don't speak of it any more. The tears of those still living have
run together and formed a lake. And it's that lake, people say, that's
being drained now, and that'll cause the river to wash us away.

LADY. Can't it be stopped by taking legal action? Is there no justice on
earth?

MOTHER. Not on earth. But there is in heaven. And heaven will drown us,
for we're the children of evildoers. (She goes up the steps.)

LADY. Isn't it enough to put up with one's own tears? Must one inherit
other people's?

(The STRANGER comes back.)

STRANGER. Did you call me?

LADY. No. I only tried to draw you to me, without really wanting you.

STRANGER. I felt you meddling with my destiny in a way that made me
uneasy. Soon you'll have learnt all I know.

LADY. And more.

STRANGER. But I must ask you not to lay rough hands on my fate. I am
Cain, you see, and am under the ban of mysterious powers, who permit no
mortals to interfere with their work of vengeance. You see this mark
on my brow? (He removes his hat.) It means: Revenge is mine, saith the
Lord.

LADY. Does your hat press....

STRANGER. No. It chafes me. And so does the coat. If it weren't that I
wanted to please you, I'd have thrown them all into the river. When
I walk here in the neighbourhood, do you know that people call me
the doctor? They must take me for your husband, the werewolf. And I'm
unlucky. If I ask who planted some tree: they say, the doctor. If I ask
to whom the green fish basket belongs: they say, the doctor. And if it
isn't his then it belongs to the doctor's wife. That is, to you! This
confusion between him and me makes my visit unbearable. I'd like to go
away....

LADY. Haven't you tried in vain to leave this place six times?

STRANGER. Yes. But the seventh, I'll succeed.

LADY. Then try!

STRANGER. You say that as if you were convinced I'd fail.

LADY. I am.

STRANGER. Plague me in some other way, dear fury.

LADY. Well, I can.

STRANGER. A new way! Try to say something ill-natured that 'the other
one's' not said already.

LADY. Your first wife's 'the other one.' How tactful to remind me of
her.

STRANGER. Everything that lives and moves, everything that's dead and
cold, reminds me of what's gone....

LADY. Until the being comes, who can wipe out the darkness of the past
and bring light.

STRANGER. You mean the child we're expecting!

LADY. Our child!

STRANGER. Do you love it?

LADY. I began to to-day.

STRANGER. To-day? Why, what's happened? Five months ago you wanted to
run off to the lawyers and divorce me; because I wouldn't take you to a
quack who'd kill your unborn child.

LADY. That was some time ago. Things have changed now.

STRANGER. Why now? (He looks round as if expecting something.) Now? Has
the post come?

LADY. You're still more cunning than I am. But the pupil will outstrip
the master.

STRANGER. Were there any letters for me?

LADY. No.

STRANGER. Then give me the wrapper?

LADY. What made you guess?

STRANGER. Give the wrapper, if your conscience can make such fine
distinctions between it and the letter.

LADY (picking up the letter-bag, which she has hidden behind the seat).
Look at this! (The STRANGER takes the photograph, looks at it carefully,
and puts it in his breast-pocket.) What was it?

STRANGER. The past.

LADY. Was it beautiful?

STRANGER. Yes. More beautiful than the future can ever be.

LADY (darkly). You shouldn't have said that.

STRANGER. No, I admit it. And I'm sorry....

LADY. Tell me, are you capable of suffering?

STRANGER. Now, I suffer twice; because I feel when you're suffering. And
if I wound you in self-defence, it's I who gets fever from the wound.

LADY. That means you're at my mercy?

STRANGER. No. Less now than ever, because you're protected by the
innocent being you carry beneath your heart.

LADY. He shall be my avenger.

STRANGER. Or mine!

LADY (tearfully). Poor little thing. Conceived in sin and shame, and
born to avenge by hate.

STRANGER. It's a long time since I've heard you speak like that.

LADY. I dare say.

STRANGER. That was the voice that first drew me to you; it was like that
of a mother speaking to her child.

LADY. When you say 'mother' I feel I can only believe good of you; but
a moment after I say to myself: it's only one more of your ways of
deceiving me.

STRANGER. What ill have I ever really done you? (The LADY is uncertain
what to reply.) Answer me. What ill have I done you?

LADY. I don't know.

STRANGER. Then invent something. Say to me: I hate you, because I can't
deceive you.

LADY. Can't I? Oh, I'm sorry for you.

STRANGER. You must have poison in the pocket of your dress.

LADY. Well, I have!

STRANGER. What can it be? (Pause.) Who's that coming down the road?

LADY. A harbinger.

STRANGER. Is it a man, or a spectre?

LADY. A spectre from the past.

STRANGER. He's wearing a black coat and a laurel crown. But his feet are
bare.

LADY. It's Caesar.

STRANGER (confused). Caesar? That was my nickname at school.

LADY. Yes. But it's also the name of the madman whom my... first husband
used to look after. Forgive me speaking of him like that.

STRANGER. Has this madman got away?

LADY. It looks like it, doesn't it?

(CAESAR comes in from the back; he wears a black frock coat and is
without a collar; he has a laurel crown on his head and his feet are
bare. His general appearance is bizarre.)

CAESAR. Why don't you greet me? You ought to say: Ave, Caesar! For now
I'm the master. The werewolf, you must know, has gone out of his mind
since the Great Man went off with his wife, whom he himself snatched
from her first lover, or bridegroom, or whatever you call him.

STRANGER (to the LADY). That was strychnine for two adults! (To CAESAR)
Where's your master now--or your slave, or doctor, or warder?

CAESAR. He'll be here soon. But you needn't be frightened of him. He
won't use daggers or poison. He only has to show himself, for all living
things to fly from him; for trees to drop their leaves, and the very
dust of the highway to run before him in a whirlwind like the pillar of
cloud before the Children of Israel....

STRANGER. Listen....

CAESAR. Quiet, whilst I'm speaking.... Sometimes he believes himself to
be a werewolf, and says he'd like to eat a little child that's not yet
born, and that's really his according to the right of priority.... (He
goes on his way.)

LADY (to the STRANGER). Can you exorcise this demon?

STRANGER. I can do nothing against devils who brave the sunshine.

LADY. Yesterday you made an arrogant remark, and now you shall have it
back. You said it wasn't fair for invisible ones to creep in by night
and strike in the darkness, they should come by day when the sun's
shining. Now they've come!

STRANGER. And that pleases you!

LADY. Yes. Almost.

STRANGER. What a pity it gives me no pleasure when it's you who's
struck! Let's sit down on the seat--the bench for the accused. For more
are coming.

LADY. I'd rather we went.

STRANGER. No, I want to see how much I can bear. You see, at every
stroke of the lash I feel as if a debit entry had been erased from my
ledger.

LADY. But I can stand no more. Look, there he comes himself. Heavens!
This man, whom I once thought I loved!

STRANGER. Thought? Yes, because everything's merely delusion. And that
means a great deal. You go! I'll take the duty on myself of confronting
him alone.

(The LADY goes up the steps, but does not reach the toy before the
DOCTOR becomes visible at the back of the stage. The DOCTOR comes in,
his grey hair long and unkempt. He is wearing a tropical helmet and a
hunting coat, which are exactly similar to the clothes of the STRANGER.
He behaves as though he doesn't notice the STRANGER'S presence, and sits
down on a stone on the other side of the road, opposite the STRANGER,
who is sitting on the seat. He takes of his hat and mops the sweat from
his brow. The STRANGER grows impatient.) What do you want?

DOCTOR. Only to see this house again, where my happiness once dwelt and
my roses blossomed....

STRANGER. An intelligent man of the world would have chosen a time when
the present inhabitants of the house were away for a short while; even
on his own account, so as not to make himself ridiculous.

DOCTOR. Ridiculous? I'd like to know which of us two's the more
ridiculous?

STRANGER. For the moment, I suppose I am.

DOCTOR. Yes. But I don't think you know the whole extent of your
wretchedness.

STRANGER. What do you mean?

DOCTOR. That you want to possess what I used to possess.

STRANGER. Well, go on.

DOCTOR. Have you noticed that we're wearing similar clothes? Good! Do
you know the reason? It's this: you're wearing the things I forgot to
fetch when the catastrophe took place. No intelligent man of the world
at the end of the nineteenth century would ever put himself into such a
position.

STRANGER (throwing down his hat and coat). Curse the woman!

DOCTOR. You needn't complain. Cast-off male attire has always been fatal
ever since the celebrated shirt of Nessus. Go in now and change. I'll
sit out here and watch, and listen, how you settle the matter alone with
that accursèd woman. Don't forget your stick! (The LADY, who is hurrying
towards the house, trips in front of the steps. The STRANGER stays where
he is in embarrassment.) The stick! The stick!

STRANGER. I don't ask mercy for the woman's sake, but for the child's.

DOCTOR (wildly). So there's a child, too. Our house, our roses, our
clothes, the bed-clothes not forgotten, and now our child! I'm within
your doors, I sit at your table, I lie in your bed; I exist in your
blood; in your lungs, in your brain; I am everywhere and yet you can't
get hold of me. When the pendulum strikes the hour of midnight, I'll
blow cold, on your heart, so that it stops like a clock that's run down.
When you sit at your work, I shall come with a poppy, invisible to you,
that will put your thoughts to sleep, and confuse your mind, so that
you'll see visions you can't distinguish from reality. I shall lie like
a stone in your path, so that you stumble; I shall be the thorn that
pricks your hand when you go to pluck the rose. My soul shall spin
itself about you like a spider's web; and I shall guide you like an ox
by means of the woman you stole from me. Your child shall be mine and
I shall speak through its mouth; you shall see my look in its eyes,
so that you'll thrust it from you like a foe. And now, belovèd house,
farewell; farewell, 'rose' room--where no happiness shall dwell that I
could envy. (He goes out. The STRANGER has been sitting on the seat all
this time, without being able to answer, and has been listening as if he
were the accused.)

Curtain.




ACT II

SCENE I

LABORATORY

[A Garden Pavilion in rococo style with high windows. In the middle of
the room there is a large writing desk on which are various pieces of
chemical and physical apparatus. Two copper wires are suspended from the
ceiling to an electroscope that is standing on the middle of the table
and which is provided with a number of bells, intended to record the
tension of atmospheric electricity.]

[On the table to the left a large old-fashioned frictional electric
generating machine, with glass plates, brass conductors, and Leyden
battery. The stands are lacquered red and white. On the right a large
old-fashioned open fireplace with tripods, crucibles, pincers, bellows,
etc.]

[In the background a door with a view of the country beyond; it is dark
and cloudy weather, but the red rays of the sun occasionally shine
into the room. A brown cloak with a cape and hood is hanging up by the
fireplace; nearby a travelling bag and an alpenstock. The STRANGER and
the MOTHER are discovered together.]

STRANGER. Where is... Ingeborg?

MOTHER. You know that better than I.

STRANGER. With the lawyer, arranging a divorce....

MOTHER. Why?

STRANGER. I told you. No, it's so far-fetched, you'll think I'm lying to
you.

MOTHER. Well, tell me!

STRANGER. She wants a divorce, because I've refused to turn this man
out, although he's deranged. She says it's cowardly of me....

MOTHER. I don't believe it.

STRANGER. You see! You only believe what you wish; all the rest is lies.
Well, can you find it in accordance with your interests to believe that
she's been stealing my letters?

MOTHER. I know nothing of that.

STRANGER. I'm not asking you whether you know of it, but whether you
believe it.

MOTHER (changing the subject). What are you trying to do here?

STRANGER. I'm making experiments concerning atmospheric electricity.

MOTHER. And that's the lighting conductor, that you've connected to the
desk!

STRANGER. Yes. But there's no danger; for the bells would ring if there
were an atmospheric disturbance.

MOTHER. That's blasphemy and black magic. Take care! And what are you
doing there, in the fireplace?

STRANGER. Making gold.

MOTHER. You think it possible?

STRANGER. You take it for granted I'm a charlatan? I shan't blame you
for that; but don't judge too quickly. At any moment I expect to get a
sworn statement of analysis.

MOTHER. I dare say. But what are you going to do if Ingeborg doesn't
come back?

STRANGER. She will, this time. Later, perhaps, when the child's here,
she'll cut herself adrift.

MOTHER. You seem very sure.

STRANGER. Yes. As I said, I still am. So long as the bond's not broken
you can feel it. When it is, you'll feel that unpleasantly clearly, too.

MOTHER. But when you've parted from one another, you may yet both be
bound to the child. You can't tell in advance.

STRANGER. I've been providing against that by a great interest, that I
hope will fill my empty life.

MOTHER. You mean gold. And honour!

STRANGER. Precisely! For a man the most enduring of all illusions.

MOTHER. So you'd build on illusions?

STRANGER. On what else should I build, when everything's illusion?

MOTHER. If you ever awake from your dream, you'll find a reality of
which you've never been able to dream.

STRANGER. Then I'll wait till that happens.

MOTHER. Wait then. Now I'll go and shut the window, before the
thunderstorm breaks.

STRANGER (going towards the back of the stage). That's going to be
interesting. (A hunting horn is heard in the distance.) Who's sounding
that horn?

MOTHER. No one knows; and it means nothing good. (She goes out.)

STRANGER (busying himself with the electroscope, and turning his back on
the open window as he does so; then taking up a book and reading aloud.)
'When Adam's race of giants had increased enough for them to consider
their number sufficient to risk an attack on those above, they began
to build a tower that was to reach up to Heaven. Those above were then
seized with fear and, in order to protect themselves, broke up the
assembled multitude by so confusing their tongues and their minds that
two people who met could not understand one another, even if they spoke
the same language Since then, those above rule by discord: divide and
rule. And the discord is upheld by the belief that the truth has been
found; but when one of the prophets is believed, he is a lying prophet.
If on the other hand a mortal succeeds in penetrating the secret of
those above, no one believes him, and he is struck with madness so that
no one ever shall. Since then mortals have been more or less demented,
particularly those who are held to be wise, but madmen are in reality
the only wise men; for they can see, hear and feel the invisible,
the inaudible and the intangible, though they cannot relate their
experiences to others.' Thus Zohar, the wisest of all the books of
wisdom, and therefore one that no one believes. I shall build no tower
of Babel, but I shall tempt the Powers into my mousetrap, and send
them to the Powers below, the subterranean ones, so that they can be
neutralised. It is the higher Schedim, who have come between mortal
men and the Lord Zabaoth; and that is why joy, peace and happiness have
vanished from the earth.

LADY (coming back in despair, throwing herself down in front of the
STRANGER and putting her arms round his feet and her head on the
ground.) Help me! Help me! And forgive me.

STRANGER. Get up. In God's name! Get up. Don't do that. What's happened?

LADY. In my anger I've behaved foolishly. I've been caught in my own
net.

STRANGER (lifting her up). Stand up, foolish child; and tell me what's
happened.

LADY. I went to the public prosecutor.

STRANGER.... and asked for a divorce....

LADY.... that was my intention; but when I got there, I laid information
against the werewolf for a breach of the peace and attempted murder.

STRANGER. But he's guilty of neither!

LADY. No, but I laid the information all the same.... And when I was
there, he came himself to lay information against me for bearing false
witness. Then I went to the lawyer and he told me that I could expect
a sentence of at least a month. Think of it, my child will be born in
prison! How can I escape from that? Help me. You can. Speak!

STRANGER. Yes, I can help you. But, if I do, don't revenge yourself on
me afterwards.

LADY. How little you know me. But tell me quickly.

STRANGER. I must take the blame on myself, and say I sent you.

LADY. How generous you are! Am I rid of the whole business now?

STRANGER. Dry your eyes, my child, and take comfort. But tell me about
something else, that's nothing to do with this. Did you leave this purse
here? (The LADY is embarrassed.) Tell me!

LADY. Has such a thing ever happened before?

STRANGER. Yes. The 'other one' wanted to discover, in this way, whether
I stole. The first time it happened I wept, because I was still young
and innocent.

LADY. Oh no!

STRANGER. Now you seem to me the most wretched creature on earth.

LADY. Is that why you love me?

STRANGER. No. You've been stealing my letters, too! Answer, yes! And
that's why you wanted to prove me a thief with this purse.

LADY. What have you got there, on the table.

STRANGER. Lightning!

(There is a flash of lightning, but no thunder.)

LADY. Aren't you afraid?

STRANGER. Yes, sometimes; but not of what you fear.

(The contorted face of the DOCTOR appears outside the window.)

LADY. Is there a cat in the room? I feel uneasy.

STRANGER. I don't think so. Yet I too have a feeling that there's
someone here.

LADY (turning and seeing the DOCTOR's face; then screaming and hurrying
to the STRANGER for protection.) Oh! There he is!

STRANGER. Where? Who?

(The DOCTOR'S face disappears.)

LADY. There, at the window. It's he!

STRANGER. I can see no one. You must be wrong.

LADY. No, I saw him. The werewolf! Can't we be rid of him?

STRANGER. Yes, we could. But it'd be useless, because he has an immortal
soul, which is bound to yours.

LADY. If I'd only known that before!

STRANGER. It's surely in the Catechism.

LADY. Then let us die!

STRANGER. That was once my religion; but as I no longer believe that
death's the end, nothing remains but to bear everything--to fight, and
to suffer!

LADY. For how long must we suffer?

STRANGER. As long as he suffers and our consciences plague us.

LADY. Then we must try and justify ourselves to our consciences; find
excuses for our frivolous actions, and discover his weaknesses.

STRANGER. Well, you can try!

LADY. You say that! Since I've known he's unhappy I can see nothing but
his qualities, and you lose when I compare you with him.

STRANGER. See how well it's arranged! His sufferings sanctify him, but
mine make me abhorrent and laughable! We must face the immutable. We've
destroyed a soul, so we are murderers.

LADY. Who is to blame?

STRANGER. He who's so mismanaged the fate of men.

(There is a flash of lightning; the electric bells begin to ring.)

LADY. O God! What's that?

STRANGER. The answer.

LADY. Is there a lightning conductor here?

STRANGER. The priest of Baal wishes to coax the lightning from
heaven....

LADY. Now I'm frightened, frightened of you. You're terrifying.

STRANGER. You see!

LADY. Who are you to defy Heaven, and to dare to play with the destinies
of men?

STRANGER. Get up and collect your thoughts. Listen to me, believe me,
and pay me the respect that's my due; and I'll lift both of us high
above this frog pond, to which we've both descended. I'll breathe on
your sick conscience so that it heals like a wound. Who am I? A man who
has done what no one else has ever done; who will overthrow the Golden
Calf and upset the tables of the money-changers. I hold the fate of the
world in my crucible; and in a week I can make the richest of the rich
a poor man. Gold, the most false of all standards, has ceased to rule;
every man will now be as poor as his neighbour, and the children of men
will hurry about like ants whose heap has been disturbed.

LADY. What good will that be to us?

STRANGER. Do you think I'll make gold in order to enrich ourselves and
others? No. I'll do it to paralyse the present order, to disrupt it, as
you'll see! I am the destroyer, the dissolver, the world incendiary;
and when all lies in ashes, I shall wander hungrily through the heaps
of ruins, rejoicing at the thought that it is all my work: that I have
written the last page of world history, which can then be held to be
ended.

(The face of the DOMINICAN appears at the open window, without being
seen by those on the stage.)

LADY. Then that was the real meaning of your last book! It was no
invention!

STRANGER. No. But in order to write it, I had to link myself with the
self of another, who could take everything from me that fettered my
soul. So that my spirit could once more find a fiery blast, on which to
mount to the ether, elude the Powers, and reach the Throne, in order to
lay the lamentations of mankind at the feet of the Eternal One.... (The
DOMINICAN makes the sign of the cross in the air and disappears.) Who's
here? Who is the Terrible One who follows me and cripples my thoughts?
Did you see no one?

LADY. No. No one.

STRANGER. But I can feel his presence. (He puts his hand to his heart.)
Can't you hear, far, far away, someone saying a rosary?

LADY. Yes, I can hear it. But it's not the Angels' Greeting. It's the
Curse of Deuteronomy! Woe unto us!

STRANGER. Then it must be in the convent of St. Saviour.

LADY. Woe! Woe!

STRANGER. Beloved. What is it?

LADY. Belovèd! Say that word again.

STRANGER. Are you ill?

LADY. No, but I'm in pain, and yet glad at the same time. Go and ask my
mother to make up my bed. But first give me your blessing.

STRANGER. Shall I...?

LADY. Say you forgive me; I may die, if the child takes my life. Say
that you love me.

STRANGER. Strange: I can't get the word to cross my lips.

LADY. Then you don't love me?

STRANGER. When you say so, it seems so to me. It's terrible, but I fear
I hate you.

LADY. Then at least give me your hand; as you'd give it to someone in
distress.

STRANGER. I'd like to, but I can't. Someone in me takes pleasure in your
agony; but it's not I. I'd like to carry you in my arms and bear your
suffering for you. But I may not. I cannot!

LADY. You're as hard as stone.

STRANGER (with restrained emotion). Perhaps not. Perhaps not.

LADY. Come to me!

STRANGER. I can't stir from here. It's as if someone had taken
possession of my soul; and I'd like to kill myself so as to take the
life of the other.

LADY. Think of your child with joy....

STRANGER. I can't even do that, for it'll bind me to earth.

LADY. If we've sinned, we've been punished! Haven't we suffered enough?

STRANGER. Not yet. But one day we shall have.

LADY (sinking down). Help me. Mercy! I shall faint!

(The STRANGER extends his hand, as if he had recovered from a cramp. The
LADY kisses it. The STRANGER lifts her up and leads her to the door of
the house.)

Curtain.


SCENE II

THE 'ROSE' ROOM

[A room with rose-coloured walls; it has small windows with iron
lattices and plants in pots. The curtains are rose red; the furniture is
white and red. In the background a door leading to a white bed-chamber;
when this door is opened, a large bed can be seen with a canopy and
white hangings. On the right the door leading out of the house. On the
left a fireplace with a coal fire. In front of it a bath tub, covered
with a white towel. A cradle covered with white, rose-coloured and
light-blue stuff. Baby clothes are spread out here and there. A green
dress hangs on the right-hand wall. Four Sisters of Mercy are on their
knees, facing the door at the back, dressed in the black and white of
Augustinian nuns. The midwife, who is in black, is by the fireplace.
The child's nurse wears a peasant's dress, of black and white, from
Brittany. The MOTHER is standing listening by the door at the back. The
STRANGER is sitting on a chair right and is trying to read a book. A
hat and a brown cloak with a cape and hood hang nearby, and on the floor
there is a small travelling bag. The Sisters of Mercy are singing a
psalm. The others join in from time to time, but not the STRANGER.]

SISTERS. Salve, Regina, mater misericordiae;

           Vita, dulcedo, et spes nostra, salve.
           Ad to clamamus, exules filii Evae;
           Ad to suspiramus gementes et flentes
           In hac lacrymarum valle.

(The STRANGER rises and goes to the MOTHER.)

MOTHER. Stay where you are! A human being's coming into the world;
another's dying. It's all the same to you.

STRANGER. I'm not so sure! If I want to go in, I'm not allowed to. And
when I don't want to, you wish it. I'd like to now.

MOTHER. She doesn't want to see you. Besides, presence here's no longer
needed. The child matters most now.

STRANGER. For you, yes; but I'm still of most importance to myself.

MOTHER. The doctor's forbidden anyone to go in, whoever they may be,
because she's in danger.

STRANGER. What doctor?

MOTHER. So your thoughts are there again!

STRANGER. Yes. And it's you who led them! An hour ago you gave me to
understand that the child couldn't be mine. With that you branded your
daughter a whore; but that means nothing to you, if you can only strike
me to the heart! You are almost the most contemptible creature I know!

MOTHER (to the SISTERS). Sisters! Pray for this unhappy man.

STRANGER. Make way for me to go in. For the last time--out of the way.

MOTHER. Leave this room, and this house too.

STRANGER. If I were to do as you ask, in ten minutes you'd send the
police after me, for abandoning my wife and child!

MOTHER. I'd only do that to have you taken to a convent you know of.

MAID (entering at the back). The Lady's asking you to do something for
her.

STRANGER. What is it?

MAID. There's supposed to be a letter in the dress she left hanging
here.

STRANGER (looks round and notices the green dress; he goes over to it
and takes a letter from the pocket). This is addressed to me, and was
opened two days ago. Broken open! That's good!

MOTHER. You must forgive someone who's as ill as your wife.

STRANGER. She wasn't ill two days ago.

MOTHER. No. But she is now.

STRANGER. But not two days ago! (Reading the letter.) Well, I'll forgive
her now, with the magnanimity of the victor.

MOTHER. Of the victor?

STRANGER. Yes. For I've done something no one's ever done before.

MOTHER. You mean the gold....?

STRANGER. Here's a certificate from the greatest living authority. Now
I'll go and see him myself.

MOTHER. Now!

STRANGER. At your request.

MAID (to the STRANGER). The Lady asks you to come in.

MOTHER. You hear?

STRANGER. No, now I don't want to! You've made your own daughter, my
wife, into a whore; and branded my unborn child a bastard. You can keep
them both. You've murdered my honour. There's nothing for me to do but
to revive it elsewhere.

MOTHER. You can never forgive!

STRANGER. I can. I forgive you--and I shall leave you. (He puts on the
brown cloak and hat, picks up his stick and travelling bag.) For if I
were to stay, I'd soon grow worse than I am now. The innocent child,
whose mission was to ennoble our warped relationship, has been defiled
by you in his mother's womb and made an apple of discord and a source of
punishment a revenge. Why should I stay here to be torn to pieces?

MOTHER. For you, duties don't exist.

STRANGER. Oh yes, they do! And the first of them's this: To protect
myself from total destruction. Farewell!

Curtain.




ACT III

SCENE I

THE BANQUETING HALL

[Room in a hotel prepared for a banquet. There are long tables laden
with flowers and candelabra. Dishes with peacocks, pheasants in full
plumage, boars' heads, entire lobsters, oysters, salmon, bundles of
asparagus, melons and grapes. There is a musicians' gallery with eight
players in the right-hand corner at the back.]

[At the high table: the STRANGER in a frock coat; next to him a Civil
Uniform with orders; a professorial Frock Coat with an order; and other
black Frock Coats with orders of a more or less striking kind. At the
second table a few Frock Coats between black Morning Coats. At the third
table clean every-day costumes. At the fourth table dirty and ragged
figures of strange appearance.]

[The tables are so arranged that the first is furthest to the left and
the fourth furthest to the right, so that the people sitting at the
fourth table cannot be seen by the STRANGER. At the fourth table CAESAR
and the DOCTOR are seated, in shabby clothes. They are the farthest down
stage. Dessert has just been handed round and the guests have golden
goblets in front of them. The band is playing a passage in the middle
of Mendelssohn's Dead March pianissimo. The guests are talking to one
another quietly.]

DOCTOR (to CAESAR). The company seems rather depressed and the dessert
came too soon!

CAESAR. By the way, the whole thing look's like a swindle! He hasn't
made any gold, that's merely a lie, like everything else.

DOCTOR. I don't know, but that's what's being said. But in our
enlightened age anything whatever may be expected.

CAESAR. There's a professor at the high table, who's supposed to be an
authority. But what subject is he professor of?

DOCTOR: I've no idea. It must be metallurgy and applied chemistry.

CAESAR. Can you see what order he's wearing?

DOCTOR. I don't know it. I expect it's some tenth rate foreign order.

CAESAR. Well, at a subscription dinner like this the company's always
rather mixed.

DOCTOR. Hm!

CAESAR. You mean, that we... hm.... I admit we're not well dressed, but
as far as intelligence goes....

DOCTOR. Listen, Caesar, you're a lunatic in my charge, and you must
avoid speaking about intelligence as much as you can.

CAESAR. That's the greatest impertinence I've heard for a long time.
Don't you realise, idiot, that I've been engaged to look after you,
since you lost your wits?

PROFESSOR (taping his goblet). Gentlemen!

CAESAR. Hear, hear!

PROFESSOR. Gentlemen! Our small society is to-day honoured by the
presence of the great man, who is our guest of honour, and when the
committee...

CAESAR (to the DOCTOR). That's the government, you know!

PROFESSOR.... and when the committee asked me to act as interpreter
and to explain the motives that prompted them I was at first doubtful
whether I could accept the honour. But when I compared my own incapacity
with that of others, I discovered that neither lost in the comparison.

VOICES. Bravo!

PROFESSOR. Gentlemen! A century of discovery is ending with the greatest
of all discoveries--foreseen by Pythagoras, prepared for by Albertus and
Paracelsus and first carried out by our guest of honour. You will permit
me to give this feeble expression of our admiration for the greatest man
of a great century. A laurel crown from the society! (He places a laurel
frown on the STRANGER'S head.) And from the committee: this! (He hangs
a shining order round the STRANGER'S neck.) Gentlemen! Three cheers for
the Great Man who has made gold!

ALL (with the exception of the STRANGER). Hurrah!

(The band plays chords from Mendelssohn's Dead March. During the last
part of the foregoing speech servants have exchanged the golden goblets
for dull tin ones, and they now begin to take away the pheasants,
peacocks, etc. The music plays softly. General conversation.)

CAESAR. Oughtn't we to taste these things before they take them away?

DOCTOR. It all seems humbug, except that about making gold.

STRANGER (knocking on the table). Gentlemen! I've always been proud of
the fact that I'm not easy to deceive...

CAESAR. Hear, hear!

STRANGER.... that I'm not easily carried away, but I am touched at the
sincerity so obvious in the great tribute you've just paid me; and when
I say touched, I mean it.

CAESAR. Bravo!

STRANGER. There are always sceptics; and moments in the life of every
man, when doubts creep into the hearts of even the strongest. I'll
confess that I myself have doubted; but after finding myself the object
this sincere and hearty demonstration, and after taking part in this
royal feast, for it is royal; and seeing that, finally, the government
itself...

VOICE. The committee!

STRANGER.... the committee, if you like, has so signally recognised my
modest merits, I doubt no longer, but believe! (The Civil Uniform creeps
out.) Yes, gentlemen, this is the greatest and most satisfying moment
of my life, because it has given me back the greatest thing any man can
possess, the belief in himself.

CAESAR. Splendid! Bravo!

STRANGER. I thank you. Your health!

(The PROFESSOR gets up. Everyone rises and the company begins to mix.
Most of the musicians go out, but two remain.)

GUEST (to the STRANGER). A delightful evening!

STRANGER. Wonderful.

(All the Frock Coats creep away.)

FATHER (an elderly, overdressed man with an eye-glass and military
bearing crosses to the doctor). What? Are you here?

DOCTOR. Yes, Father-in-law. I'm here. I go everywhere he goes.

FATHER. It's too late in the day to call me father-in-law. Besides, I'm
_his_ father-in-law now.

DOCTOR. Does he know you?

FATHER. No. He's not had that honour; and I must ask you to preserve my
incognito. Is it true he's made gold?

DOCTOR. So it's said. But it's certain he left his wife while she was in
childbed.

FATHER. Does that mean I can expect a third son-in-law soon? I don't
like the idea! The uncertainty of my position makes me hate being
a father-in-law at all. Of course, I've nothing to say against it,
since....

(The tables have now been cleared; the cloths and the candelabra have
been removed, so that the tables themselves, which are merely boards
supported on trestles, are all that remain. A big stoneware jug has
been brought in and small jugs of simple form have been put on the high
table. The people in rags sit down next to the STRANGER at the high
table; and the FATHER sits astride a chair and stares at him.)

CAESAR (knocking on the table). Gentlemen! This feast has been called
royal, not on account of the excellence of the service which, on the
contrary, has been wretched; but because the man, whom we have honoured,
is a king, a king in the realm of the Intellect. Only I am able to judge
of that. (One of the people in rags laughs.) Quiet. Wretch! But he's
more than a king, he's a man of the people, of the humblest. A friend
of the oppressed, the guardian of fools, the bringer of happiness to
idiots. I don't know whether he's succeeded in making gold. I don't
worry about that, and I hardly believe it... (There is a murmur. Two
policemen come in and sit by the door; the musicians come down and take
seats at the tables.)... but supposing he has, he has answered all the
questions that the daily press has been trying to solve for the last
fifty years.... It's only an assumption--

STRANGER. Gentlemen!

RAGGED PERSON. No. Don't interrupt him.

CAESAR. A mere assumption without real foundation, and the analysis may
be wrong!

ANOTHER RAGGED PERSON. Don't talk nonsense!

STRANGER. Speaking in my capacity as guest of honour at this gathering I
should say that it would be of interest to those taking part to hear the
grounds on which I've based my proof....

CAESAR. We don't want to hear that. No, no.

FATHER. Wait! I think justice demands that the accused should be allowed
to explain himself. Couldn't our guest of honour tell the company his
secret in a few words?

STRANGER. As the discoverer I can't give away my secret. But that's not
necessary, because I've submitted my results to an authority under oath.

CAESAR. Then the whole thing's nonsense, the whole thing! We don't
believe authorities--we're free-thinkers. Did you ever hear anything
so impudent? That we should honour a mystery man, an arch-swindler, a
charlatan, in good faith.

FATHER. Wait a little, my good people!

(During this scene a wall screen, charmingly decorated with palm trees
and birds of paradise, has been taken away, disclosing a wretched
serving-counter and stand for beer mugs, behind which a waitress is seen
dispensing tots of spirits. Scavengers and dirty-looking women go over
to the counter and start drinking.)

STRANGER. Was I asked here to be insulted?

FATHER. Not at all. My friend's rather loquacious, but he's not said
anything insulting yet.

STRANGER. Isn't it insulting to be called a charlatan?

FATHER. He didn't mean it seriously.

STRANGER. Even as a joke I think the word arch-swindler slanderous.

FATHER. He didn't use _that_ word.

STRANGER. What? I appeal to the company: wasn't the word he used
arch-swindler?

ALL. No. He never said that!

STRANGER. Then I don't know where I am--or what company I've got into.

RAGGED PERSON. Is there anything wrong with it?

(The people murmur.)

BEGGAR (comes forward, supporting himself on crutches; he strikes the
table so hard with his crutch, that some mugs are broken.) Mr. Chairman!
May I speak? (He breaks some more crockery.) Gentlemen, in this life
I've not allowed thyself to be easily deceived, but this time I have
been. My friend in the chair there has convinced me that I've been
completely deceived on the question of his power of judgment and sound
understanding, and I feel touched. There are limits to pity and limits
also to cruelty. I don't like to see real merit being dragged into the
dust, and this man's worth a better fate than his folly's leading him
to.

STRANGER. What does this mean?

(The FATHER and the DOCTOR have gone out during this scene without
attracting attention. Only beggars remain at the high table. Those who
are drinking gather into groups and stare at the STRANGER.)

BEGGAR. You take yourself to be the man of the century, and accept the
invitation of the Drunkards' Society, in order to have yourself fêted as
a man of science....

STRANGER (rising). But the government....

BEGGAR. Oh yes, the Committee of the Drunkards' Society have given you
their highest distinction--that order you've had to pay for yourself....

STRANGER. What about the professor?

BEGGAR. He only calls himself that; he's no professor really, though he
does give lessons. And the uniform that must have impressed you most was
that of a lackey in a chancellery.

STRANGER (tearing of the wreath and the ribbon of the order). Very well!
But who was the elderly man with the eyeglass?

BEGGAR. Your father-in-law!

STRANGER. Who got up this hoax?

BEGGAR. It's no hoax, it's quite serious. The professor came on behalf
of the Society, for so they call themselves, and asked you whether you'd
accept the fête. You accepted it; so it became serious!

(Two dirty-looking women carry in a dust-bin suspended from a stick and
set it down on the high table.)

FIRST WOMAN. If you're the man who makes gold, you might buy two
brandies for us.

STRANGER. What's this mean?

BEGGAR. It's the last part of the reception; and it's supposed to mean
that gold's mere rubbish.

STRANGER. If only that were true, rubbish could be exchanged for gold.

BEGGAR. Well, it's only the philosophy of the Society of Drunkards. And
you've got to take your philosophy where you find it.

SECOND WOMAN (sitting down next to the STRANGER). Do you recognise me?

STRANGER. No.

SECOND WOMAN. Oh, you needn't be embarrassed so late in the evening as
this!

STRANGER. You believe you're one of my victims? That I was amongst the
first hundred who seduced you?

SECOND WOMAN. No. It's not what you think. But I once came across a
printed paper, when I was about to be confirmed, which said that it was
a duty to oneself to give way to all desires of the flesh. Well, I grew
free and blossomed; and this is the fruit of my highly developed self!

STRANGER (rising). Perhaps I may go now?

WAITRESS (coming over with a bill). Yes. But the bill must be paid
first.

STRANGER. What? By me? I haven't ordered anything.

WAITRESS. I know nothing of that; but you're the last of the company to
have had anything.

STRANGER (to the BEGGAR). Is this all a part of the reception?

BEGGAR. Yes, certainly. And, as you know, everything costs money, even
honour....

STRANGER (taking a visiting card and handing it to the waitress).
There's my card. You'll be paid to-morrow.

WAITRESS (putting the card in the dust-bin). Hm! I don't know the name;
and I've put a lot of such cards into the dust-bin. I want the money.

BEGGAR. Listen, madam, I'll guarantee this man will pay.

WAITRESS. So you'd like to play tricks on me too! Officer! One moment,
please.

POLICEMAN. What's all this about? Payment, I suppose. Come to the
station; we'll arrange things there. (He writes something in his
note-book.)

STRANGER. I'd rather do that than stay here and quarrel.... (To the
BEGGAR.) I don't mind a joke, but I never expected such cruel reality as
this.

BEGGAR. Anything's to be expected, once you challenge persons as
powerful as you have! Let me tell you this in confidence. You'd better
be prepared for worse, for the very worst!

STRANGER. To think I've been so duped... so...

BEGGAR. Feasts of Belshazzar always end in one way a hand's stretched
out--and writes a bill. And another hand's laid on the guest's shoulder
and leads him to the police station! But it must be done royally!

POLICEMAN (laying his hand on the STRANGER). Have you talked enough?

THE WOMEN and RAGGED ONES. The alchemist can't pay. Hurrah! He's going
to gaol. He's going to gaol!

SECOND WOMAN. Yes, but it's a shame.

STRANGER. You're sorry for me? I thank you for that, even if I don't
quite deserve it! _You_ felt pity for me!

SECOND WOMAN. Yes. That's also something I learnt from you.

(The scene is changed without lowering the curtain. The stage is
darkened, and a medley of scenes, representing landscapes, palaces,
rooms, is lowered and brought forward; so that characters and furniture
are no longer seen, but the STRANGER alone remains visible and seems to
be standing stiffly as though unconscious. At last even he disappears,
and from the confusion a prison cell emerges.)


SCENE II

PRISON CELL

[On the right a door; and above it a barred opening, through which a ray
of sunlight is shining, throwing a patch of light on the left-hand wall,
where a large crucifix hangs.]

[The STRANGER, dressed in a brown cloak and wearing a hat, is sitting at
the table looking at the patch of sunlight. The door is opened and the
BEGGAR is let in.]

BEGGAR. What are you brooding over?

STRANGER. I'm asking myself why I'm here; and then: where I was
yesterday?

BEGGAR. Where do you think?

STRANGER. It seems in hell; unless I dreamed everything.

BEGGAR. Then wake up now, for this is going to be reality.

STRANGER. Let it come. I'm only afraid of ghosts.

BEGGAR (taking out a newspaper). Firstly, the great authority has
withdrawn the certificate he gave you for making gold. He says, in this
paper, that you deceived him. The result is that the paper calls you a
charlatan!

STRANGER. O God! What is it I'm fighting?

BEGGAR. Difficulties, like other men.

STRANGER. No, this is something else....

BEGGAR. Your own credulity, then.

STRANGER. No, I'm not credulous, and I know I'm right.

BEGGAR. What's the good of that, if no one else does.

STRANGER. Shall I ever get out of this prison? If I do, I'll settle
everything.

BEGGAR. The matter's arranged; everything's paid for.

STRANGER. Oh? Who paid, then?

BEGGAR. The Society, I suppose; or the Drunkard's Government.

STRANGER. Then I can go?

BEGGAR. Yes. But there's one thing....

STRANGER. Well, what is it?

BEGGAR. Remember, an enlightened man of the world mustn't let himself be
taken by surprise.

STRANGER. I begin to divine....

BEGGAR. The announcement's on the front page.

STRANGER. That means: she's already married again, and my children have
a stepfather. Who is he?

BEGGAR. Whoever he is, don't murder him; for he's not to blame for
taking in a forsaken woman.

STRANGER. My children! O God, my children!

BEGGAR. I notice you didn't foresee what's happened; but why not look
ahead, if you're so old and such an enlightened man of the world.

STRANGER (beside himself). O God! My children!

BEGGAR. Enlightened men of the world don't weep! Stop it, my son. When
such disasters happen men of the world... either... well, tell me....

STRANGER. Shoot themselves!

BEGGAR. Or?

STRANGER. No, not that!

BEGGAR. Yes, my son, precisely that! He's throwing out a sheet-anchor as
an experiment.

STRANGER. This is irrevocable. Irrevocable!

BEGGAR. Yes, it is. Quite irrevocable. And you can live another
lifetime, in order to contemplate your own rascality in peace.

STRANGER. You should be ashamed to talk like that.

BEGGAR. And you?

STRANGER. Have you ever seen a human destiny like mine?

BEGGAR. Well, look at mine!

STRANGER. I know nothing of yours.

BEGGAR. It's never occurred to you, in all our long acquaintance, to
ask about my affairs. You once scorned the friendship I offered you, and
fell straightway into the arms of boon companions. I hope it'll do you
good. And so farewell, till the next time.

STRANGER. Don't go.

BEGGAR. Perhaps you'd like company when you get out of prison?

STRANGER. Why not?

BEGGAR. It hasn't occurred to you I mightn't want to show myself in
_your_ company?

STRANGER. It certainly hasn't.

BEGGAR. But it's true. Do you think I want to be suspected of having
been at that immortal banquet in the alchemist's honour, of which
there's an account in the morning paper?

STRANGER. He doesn't want to be seen with me!

BEGGAR. Even a beggar has his pride and fears ridicule.

STRANGER. He doesn't want to be seen with me. Am I then sunk to such
misery?

BEGGAR. You must ask yourself that, and answer it, too.

(A mournful cradle song is heard in the distance.)

STRANGER. What's that?

BEGGAR. A song sung by a mother at her baby's cradle.

STRANGER. Why must I be reminded of it just now?

BEGGAR. Probably so that you can feel really keenly what you've left for
a chimera.

STRANGER. Is it possible I could have been wrong? If so it's the devil's
work, and I'll lay down my arms.

BEGGAR. You'd better do that as soon as you can....

STRANGER. Not yet! (A rosary can be heard being repeated in the
distance.) What's that? (A sustained note of a horn is heard.) That's
the unknown huntsman! (The chord from the Dead March is heard.) Where am
I? (He remains where he is as if hypnotised.)

BEGGAR. Bow yourself or break!

STRANGER. I cannot bow!

BEGGAR. Then break.

(The STRANGER falls to the ground. The same confused medley of scenes as
before.)

Curtain.


SCENE III

THE 'ROSE' ROOM

[The same scene as Act I. The kneeling Sisters of Mercy are now reading
their prayer books, '... exules filii Evae; Ad to suspiramus et flentes
In hac lacrymarum aalle.' The MOTHER is by the door at the back; the
FATHER by the door on the right.]

MOTHER (going towards him). So you've come back again?

FATHER (humbly). Yes.

MOTHER. Your lady-love's left you?

RATHER. Don't be more cruel than you need!

MOTHER. You say that to me, you who gave my wedding presents to your
mistress. You, who were so dishonourable as to expect me, your wife, to
choose presents for her. You, who wanted my advice about colour and cut,
in order to educate her taste in dress! What do you want here?

FATHER. I heard that my daughter...

MOTHER. Your daughter's lying there, between life and death; and you
know that her feelings for you have grown hostile. That's why I ask you
to go; before she suspects your presence.

FATHER. You're right, and I can't answer you. But let me sit in the
kitchen, for I'm tired. Very tired.

MOTHER. Where were you last night?

FATHER. At the club. But I wanted to ask you if the husband weren't
here?

MOTHER. Am I to lay bare all this misery? Don't you know your daughter's
tragic fate?

FATHER. Yes... I do. And what a husband!

MOTHER. What men! Go downstairs now and sleep off your liquor.

FATHER. The sins of the fathers....

MOTHER. You're talking nonsense.

FATHER. Of course I don't mean my sins... but those of our parents. And
now they say the lake up there's to be drained, so that the river will
rise....

MOTHER (pushing him out of the door). Silence. Misfortune will overtake
us soon enough, without you calling it up.

MAID (from the bedroom at the back). The lady's asking for the master.

MOTHER. She means her husband.

MAID. Yes. The master of the house, her husband.

MOTHER. He went out a little while ago.

(The STRANGER comes in.)

STRANGER. Has the child been born?

MOTHER. No. Not yet.

STRANGER (putting his hand to his forehead). What? Can it take so long?

MOTHER. Long? What do you mean?

STRANGER (looking about him). I don't know what I mean. How is it with
the mother?

MOTHER. She's just the same.

STRANGER. The same?

MOTHER. Don't you want to get back to your gold making?

STRANGER. I can't make head or tail of it! But there's still hope my
worst dream was nothing but a dream.

MOTHER. You really look as if you were walking in your sleep.

STRANGER. Do I? Oh, I wish I were! The one thing I fear I'd fear no
longer.

MOTHER. He who guides your destiny seems to know your weakest spots.

STRANGER. And when there was only one left, he found that too; happily
for me only in a dream! Blind Powers! Powerless Ones!

MAID (coming in again). The lady asks you to do her a service.

STRANGER. There she lies like an electric eel, giving shocks from a
distance. What kind of service is it to be now?

MAID. There's a letter in the pocket of her green coat.

STRANGER. No good will come of that! (He takes the letter out of the
green coat, which is hanging near the dress by fireplace.) I must
be dead. I dreamed this, and now it's happening. My children have a
stepfather!

MOTHER. Who are you going to blame?

STRANGER. Myself! I'd rather blame no one. I've lost my children.

MOTHER. You'll get a new one here.

STRANGER. He might be cruel to them....

MOTHER. Then their sufferings will burden your conscience, if you have
one.

STRANGER. Supposing he were to beat them?

MOTHER. Do you know what I'd do in your place?

STRANGER. Yes, I know what you'd do; but I don't know what I'll do.

MOTHER (to the Sisters of Mercy). Pray for this man!

STRANGER. No, no. Not that! It'll do no good, and I don't believe in
prayer.

MOTHER. But you believe in your gold?

STRANGER. Not even in that. It's over. All over!

(The MIDWIFE comes out of the bedroom.)

MIDWIFE. A child's born. Praise the Lord!

MOTHER. Let the Lord be praised!

SISTERS. Let the Lord be praised!

MIDWIFE (to the STRANGER). Your wife's given you daughter.

MOTHER (to the STRANGER). Don't you want to see your child?

STRANGER. No. I no longer want to tie myself anything on earth. I'm
afraid I'd get to love her, and then you'd tear the heart from my body.
Let me get out of this atmosphere, which is too pure for me. Don' t let
that innocent child come near me, for I'm a man already damned, already
sentenced, and for me there's no joy, no peace, and no... forgiveness!

MOTHER. My son, now you're speaking words of wisdom! Truthfully and
without malice: I welcome your decision. There's no place for you here,
and amongst us women you'd be plagued to death. So go in peace.

STRANGER. There'll be no more peace, but I'll go. Farewell!

MOTHER. Exules filii Evae; on earth you shall be a fugitive and a
vagabond.

STRANGER. Because I have slain my brother.

Curtain.




ACT IV

SCENE I

BANQUETING HALL

[The room in which the banquet took place in Act III. It is dirty, and
furnished with unpainted wooden tables. Beggars, scavengers and loose
women. Cripples are seated here and there drinking by the light of
tallow dips.]

[The STRANGER and the SECOND WOMAN are sitting together drinking brandy,
which stands on the table in front of them in a carafe. The STRANGER is
drinking heavily.]

WOMAN. Don't drink so much!

STRANGER. You see. You've scruples, too!

WOMAN. No. But I don't like to see a man I respect lowering himself so.

STRANGER. But I came here specially to do so; to take a mud-bath that
would harden my skin against the pricks of life. To find immoral support
about me. And I chose your company, because you're the most despicable,
though you've still retained a spark of humanity. You were sorry for me,
when no one else was. Not even myself! Why?

WOMAN. Really, I don't know.

STRANGER. But you must know that there are moments when you look almost
beautiful.

WOMAN. Oh, listen to him!

STRANGER. Yes. And then you resemble a woman who was dear to me.

WOMAN. Thank you!

WAITRESS. Don't talk so loud, there's a sick man here.

STRANGER. Tell me, have you ever been in love?

WOMAN. We don't use that word, but I know what you mean. Yes. I had a
lover once and we had a child.

STRANGER. That was foolish!

WOMAN. I thought so, too, but he said the days liberation were at hand,
when all chains would be struck off, all barriers thrown down, and...

STRANGER (tortured). And then...?

WOMAN. Then he left me.

STRANGER. He was a scoundrel. (He drinks.)

WOMAN (looking at him.) You think so?

STRANGER. Yes. He must have been.

WOMAN. Now you're so intolerant.

STRANGER (drinking). Am I?

WOMAN. Don't drink so much; I want to see you far above me, otherwise
you can't raise me up.

STRANGER. What illusions you must have! Childish! I lift you up! I who
am down below. Yet I'm not; it's not I who sit here, for I'm dead. I
know that my soul's far away, far, far away.... (He stares in front
of him with an absent-minded air)... where a great lake lies in the
sunshine like molten gold; where roses blossom on the wall amongst
the vines; where a white cot stands under the acacias. But the child's
asleep and the mother's sitting beside the cot doing crochet work.
There's a long, long strip coming from her mouth and on the strip
is written... wait... 'Blessed are the sorrowful, for they shall be
comforted.' But that's not so, really. I shall never be comforted. Tell
me, isn't there thunder in the air, it's so close, so hot?

WOMAN (looking out of the window). No. I can see no clouds out there....

STRANGER. Strange... that's lightning.

WOMAN. No. You're wrong.

STRANGER. One, two, three, four, five... now the thunder must come! But
it doesn't. I've never been frightened of a thunderstorm until to-day--I
mean, until to-night. But is it day or night?

WOMAN. My dear, it's night.

STRANGER. Yes. It _is_ night.

(The DOCTOR has come in during this scene and has sat down behind the
STRANGER, without having been seen by him.)

WAITRESS. Don't speak so loud, there's a sick person in here.

STRANGER (to the WOMAN). Give me your hand.

WOMAN (wiping it on her apron). Oh, why?

STRANGER. You've a lovely white hand. But... look at mine. It's black.
Can't you see it's black?

WOMAN. Yes. So it is!

STRANGER. Blackened already, perhaps even rotten? I must see if my
heart's stopped. (He puts his hand to his heart.) Yes. It has! So I'm
dead, and I know when I died. Strange, to be dead, and yet to be going
about. But where am I? Are all these people dead, too? They look as
if they'd risen from the sewers of the town, or as if they'd come
from prison, poorhouse or lock hospital. They're workers of the night,
suffering, groaning, cursing, quarrelling, torturing one another,
dishonouring one another, envying one another, as if they possessed
anything worthy of envy! The fire of sleep courses through their veins,
their tongues cleave to their palates, grown dry through cursing; and
then they put out the blaze with water, with fire-water, that engenders
fresh thirst. With fire-water, that itself burns with a blue flame and
consumes the soul like a prairie fire, that leaves nothing behind it but
red sand. (He drinks.) Set fire to it. Put it out again. Set fire to it.
Put it out again! But what you can't burn up--unluckily--is the memory
of what's past. How can that memory be burned to ashes?

WAITRESS. Please don't speak so loud, there's a sick man in here. So
ill, that he's already asked to be given the sacrament.

STRANGER. May he soon go to hell!

(Those present murmur at this, resenting it.)

WAITRESS. Take care! Take care!

WOMAN (to the STRANGER). Do you know that man who's been sitting behind
you, staring at you all the time?

STRANGER (turning. He and the DOCTOR stare at one another for a moment,
without speaking). Yes. I used to know him once.

WOMAN. He looks as if he'd like to bite you in the back.

(The DOCTOR sits down opposite the STRANGER and stares at him.)

STRANGER. What are you looking at?

DOCTOR. Your grey hairs.

STRANGER (to the WOMAN). Is my hair grey?

WOMAN. Yes. Indeed it is!

DOCTOR. And now I'm looking at your fair companion. Sometimes you have
good taste. Sometimes not.

STRANGER. And sometimes you have the misfortune to have the same taste
as I.

DOCTOR. That wasn't a kind remark! But you've killed me twice in your
lifetime; so go on.

STRANGER (to the WOMAN). Let's get away from here.

DOCTOR. You know when I'm near you. You feel my presence from afar. And
I shall reach you, as the thunder will, whether you hide in the depths
of the earth or of the sea.... Try to escape me, if you can!

STRANGER (to the WOMAN). Come with me. Lead me... I can't see....

WOMAN. No, I don't want to go yet. I don't want to be bored.

DOCTOR. You're right there, daughter of joy! Life's hard enough without
taking on yourself the sorrows others have brought on themselves. That
man won't bear his own sorrows, but makes his wife shoulder the burden
for him.

STRANGER. What's that? Wait! She bore false witness of a breach of the
peace and attempted murder!

DOCTOR. Now he's putting the blame on her!

STRANGER (resting his head in his hands and letting it sink on to the
table. In the far distance a violin and guitar are heard playing the
following melody):

[See picture road1.jpg]

DOCTOR (to the WOMAN). Is he ill?

WOMAN. He must be mad; he says he's dead.

(In the distance drums beat the reveille and bugles are blown, but very
softly.)

STRANGER. Is it morning? Night's passing, the sun's rising and ghosts
lie down to sleep again in graves. Now I can go. Come!

WOMAN (going nearer to the DOCTOR). No. I said no.

STRANGER. Even you, the last of all my friends! Am I such a wretched
being, that not even a prostitute will bear me company for money?

DOCTOR. You must be.

STRANGER. I don't believe it yet; although everyone tells me so. I don't
believe anything at all, for every time I have, I've been deceived. But
tell me this hasn't the sun yet risen? A little while ago I heard a cock
crow and a dog bark; and now they're ringing the Angelus.... Have they
put out the lights, that it's so dark?

DOCTOR (to the WOMAN). He must be blind.

WOMAN. Yes. I think he is.

STRANGER. No. I can see you; but I can't see the lights.

DOCTOR. For you it's growing dark.... You've played with the lightning,
and looked too long at the sun. That is forbidden to men.

STRANGER. We're born with the desire to do it; but may not. That's
Envy....

DOCTOR. What do you possess that's worthy of envy?

STRANGER. Something you'll never understand, and that only I can value.

DOCTOR. You mean, the child?

MANGER. You know I didn't mean it. If I had I'd have said that I
possessed something you could never let.

DOCTOR. So you're back at that! Then I'll express myself as clearly: you
took what I'd done with.

WOMAN. Oh! I shan't stay in the company of such swine! (She gets up and
moves to another seat.)

STRANGER. I know we've sunk very low; yet I believe the deeper I sink
the nearer I'll come to my goal: the end!

WAITRESS. Don't speak so loud, there's a dying man in there!

STRANGER. Yes, I believe you. The whole time there's been a smell of
corpses here.

DOCTOR. Perhaps that's us?

STRANGER. Can one be dead, without suspecting it?

DOCTOR. The dead maintain that they don't know the difference.

STRANGER. You terrify me. Is it possible? And all these shadowy figures,
whose faces I think I recognise as memories of my youth at school in the
swimming bath, the gymnasium.... (He clutches his heart.) Oh! Now he's
coming: the Terrible One, who tears the heart out of the breast. The
Terrible One, who's been following me for years. He's here!

(He is beside himself. The doors are thrown open; a choir boy comes in
carrying a lantern made of blue glass that throws a blue light on the
guests; he rings the silver bell. All present begin to howl like wild
beasts. The DOMINICAN then enters with the sacrament. The WAITRESS
and the WOMAN throw themselves on their knees, the others howl. The
DOMINICAN raises the monstrance; all fall on their knees. The choir boy
and the DOMINICAN go into the room on the left.)

BEGGAR (entering and going towards the STRANGER). Come away from here.
You're ill. And the bailiffs have a summons for you.

STRANGER. Summons? From whom?

BEGGAR. Your wife.

DOCTOR. The electric eel strikes at a great distance. She once wanted to
bring a charge of slander against me, because she couldn't stay out at
night.

STRANGER. Couldn't stay out at night?

DOCTOR. Yes. Didn't you know who you were married to?

STRANGER. I heard she'd been engaged before she... married you.

DOCTOR. Yes. That's what it was called, but in reality she'd been the
mistress of a married man, whom she denounced for rape, after she'd
forced herself into his studio and posed to him naked, as a model.

STRANGER. And that was the woman you married?

DOCTOR. Yes. After she'd seduced me, she denounced me for breach of
promise, so I had to marry her. She'd engaged two detectives to see I
didn't get away. And that was the woman you married!

STRANGER. I did it because I soon saw it was no good choosing when all
were alike.

BEGGAR. Come away from here. You'll be sorry if you don't.

STRANGER (to the DOCTOR). Was she always religious?

DOCTOR. Always.

STRANGER. And tender, good-hearted, self-sacrificing?

DOCTOR. Certainly!

STRANGER. Can one understand her?

DOCTOR. No. But you can go mad thinking about her. That's why one had to
accept her as she was. Charming, intoxicating!

STRANGER. Yes, I know. But one's powerless against pity. That's why I
don't want to fight this case. I can't defend myself without attacking
her; and I don't want to do that.

DOCTOR. You were married before. How was that?

STRANGER. Just the same.

DOCTOR. This love acts like henbane: you see suns, where there are none,
and stars where no stars are! But it's pleasant, while it lasts!

STRANGER. And the morning after? Oh, the morning after!

BEGGAR. Come, unhappy man! He's poisoning you, and you don't know it.
Come!

STRANGER (getting up). Poisoning me, you say? Do you think he's lying?

BEGGAR. Every word he's said's a lie.

STRANGER. I don't believe it.

BEGGAR. No. You only believe lies. But that serves you right.

STRANGER. Has he been lying? Has he?

BEGGAR. How can you believe your enemies?

STRANGER. But he's my friend, because he's told me the bitter truth.

BEGGAR. Eternal Powers, save his reason! For he believes everything
evil's true, and everything good evil. Come, or you'll be lost!

DOCTOR. He's lost already! And now he'll be whipped into froth, broken
up into atoms, and used as an ingredient in the great pan-cake. Away
with you hell! (To those present.) Howl like victims of the pit. (The
guests all howl.) And no more womanly pity. Howl, woman! (The WOMAN
refuses with a gesture of her hand.)

STRANGER (to the BEGGAR). That man's not lying.

Curtain.


SCENE II

IN A RAVINE

[A ravine with a stream in the middle, which is crossed by a
foot-bridge. In the foreground a smithy and a mill, both of which are
in ruins. Fallen trees choke the stream. In the background a starry sky
above the pine wood. The constellation of Orion is clearly visible.]

[See picture road2.jpg]

[The STRANGER and the BEGGAR enter. In the foreground there is snow; in
the background the green of summer.]

STRANGER. I feel afraid! To-night the stars seem to hang so low, that I
fear they'll fall on me like drops of molten silver. Where are we?

BEGGAR. In the ravine, by the stream. You must know the place.

STRANGER. Know it? As if I could ever forget it! It reminds me of my
honeymoon journey. But where are the smithy and the mill?

BEGGAR. All in ruins! The lake of tears was drained a week ago. The
stream rose, then the river, till everything was laid waste--meadows,
fields and gardens.

STRANGER. And the quiet house?

BEGGAR. The old sin was washed away, but the walls in left.

STRANGER. And those who lived there?

BEGGAR. They've gone to the colonies; so that the story's now at an end.

STRANGER. Then my story's at an end too. So thoroughly at an end, that
no happy memories remain. The last was fouled by the poisoner....

BEGGAR. Whose poison you prepared! You should declare your bankruptcy.

STRANGER. Yes. Now I'll have to give in.

BEGGAR. Then the day of reckoning will draw near.

STRANGER. I think we might call it quits; because, if I've sinned, I've
been punished.

BEGGAR. But others certainly won't think so.

STRANGER. I've stopped taking account of others, since I saw that the
Powers that guide the destinies of mankind brook no accomplices. The
crime I committed in this life was that I wanted to set men free....

BEGGAR. Set men free from their duties, and criminals from their feeling
of guilt, so that they could really become unscrupulous! You're not the
first, and not the last to dabble in the Devil's work. Lucifer a non
lucendo! But when Reynard grows old, he turns monk--so wisely is it
ordained--and then he's forced to split himself in two and drive out
Beelzebub with his own penance.

STRANGER. Shall I be driven to that?

BEGGAR. Yes. Though you don't want it! You'll be forced to preach
against yourself from the housetops. To unpick your fabric thread by
thread. To flay yourself alive at every street corner, and show what
you really are. But that needs courage. All the same, a man who's played
with the thunder will not tremble! Yet, sometimes, when night falls and
the Invisible Ones, who can only be seen in darkness, ride on his chest,
then he will fear--even the stars, and most of all the Mill of Sins,
that grinds the past, and grinds it... and grinds it! One of the
seven-and-seventeen Wise Men said that the greatest victory he ever
won was over himself; but foolish men don't believe it, and that's why
they're deceived; because they only credit what nine-and-ninety fools
have said a thousand times.

STRANGER. Enough! Tell me; isn't this snow here on the ground?

BEGGAR. Yes. It's winter here.

STRANGER. But over there it's green.

BEGGAR. It's summer there.

STRANGER. And growing light! (A clear beam of light falls on the
foot-bridge.)

BEGGAR. Yes. It's light there, and dark here.

STRANGER. And who are they? (Three children, dressed is summer clothing,
two girls and a boy, come on to the bridge from the right.) Ho! My
children! (The children stop to listen, and then look at the STRANGER
without seeming to recognise him. The STRANGER calls.) Gerda! Erik!
Thyra! It's your father! (The children appear to recognise him; they
turn away to the left.) They don't know me. They don't want to know me.

(A man and a woman enter from the right. The children dance of to the
left and disappear. The STRANGER falls on his face on the ground.)

BEGGAR. Something like that was to be expected. Such things happen. Get
up again!

STRANGER (raising himself up). Where am I? Where have I been? Is
it spring, winter or summer? In what century am I living, in what
hemisphere? Am I a child or an old man, male or female, a god or a
devil? And who are you? Are you, you; or are you me? Are those my own
entrails that I see about me? Are those stars or bundles of nerves in my
eye; is that water, or is it tears? Wait! Now I'm moving forward in time
for a thousand years, and beginning to shrink, to grow heavier and to
crystallise! Soon I'll be re-created, and from the dark waters of Chaos
the Lotus flower will stretch up her head towards the sun and say: it is
I! I must have been sleeping for a few thousand years; and have dreamed
I'd exploded and become ether, and could no longer feel, no longer
suffer, no longer be joyful; but had entered into peace and equilibrium.
But now! Now! I suffer as much as if I were all mankind. I suffer and
have no right to complain....

BEGGAR. Then suffer, and the more you suffer the earlier pain will leave
you.

STRANGER. No. Mine are eternal sufferings....

BEGGAR. And only a minute's passed.

STRANGER. I can't bear it.

BEGGAR. Then you must look for help.

STRANGER. What's coming now? Isn't it the end yet?

(It grows light above the bridge. CAESAR comes in and throws himself
from the parapet; then the DOCTOR appears on the right, with bare head
and a wild look. He behaves as if he would throw himself into the stream
too.)

STRANGER. He's revenged himself so thoroughly, that he awakes no qualms
of conscience! (The DOCTOR goes out, left. The SISTER enters, right, as
if searching for someone.) Who's that?

BEGGAR. His unmarried sister, who's unprovided for, and has now no home
to go to. She's grown desperate since her brother was driven out of his
wits by sorrow and went to pieces.

STRANGER. That's a harder fate. Poor creature, what can one do? Even if
I felt her sufferings, would that help her?

BEGGAR. No. It wouldn't.

STRANGER. Why do qualms of conscience come after, and not beforehand?
Can you help me over that?

BEGGAR. No. No one can. Let us go on.

STRANGER. Where to?

BEGGAR. Come with me.

Curtain.


SCENE III

THE 'ROSE' ROOM

[The LADY, dressed in white, is sitting by the cradle doing crochet
work. The green dress is hanging up by the door on the right. The
STRANGER comes in, and looks round in astonishment.]

LADY (simply, mildly, without a trace of surprise). Tread softly and
come here, if you'd see something lovely.

STRANGER. Where am I?

LADY. Quiet! Look at the little stranger who came when you were away.

STRANGER. They told me the river had risen and swept everything off.

LADY. Why do you believe everything you're told? The river did rise,
but this little creature has someone who protects both her and hers.
Wouldn't you like to see your daughter? (The STRANGER goes towards
the cradle. The LADY lifts the curtain.) She's lovely! Isn't she? (The
STRANGER gazes darkly in front of him.) Won't you look?

STRANGER. Everything's poisoned. Everything!

LADY. Well, perhaps!

STRANGER. Do you know that he has lost his wits and is wandering in the
neighbourhood, followed by his sister, who's searching for him? He's
penniless, and drinking....

LADY. Oh, my God!

STRANGER. Why don't you reproach me?

LADY. You'll reproach yourself enough: I'd rather give you good advice.
Go to the Convent of St. Saviour's, there you'll find a man who can free
you from the evil you fear.

STRANGER. What, in the convent, where they curse and bind?

LADY. And deliver also!

STRANGER. Frankly, I think you're trying to deceive me; I don't trust
you any more.

LADY. Nor I, you! So look on this as your farewell visit.

STRANGER. That was my intention; but first I wanted to find out if we're
of the same mind....

LADY. You see, we can build no happiness on the sorrows of others; so
we must part. That's the only way to lessen his sufferings. I have my
child, who'll fill my life for me; and you have the great goal of your
ambition....

STRANGER. Will you still mock me?

LADY. No, why? You've solved the great problem.

STRANGER. Be quiet! No more of that, even if you believe it.

LADY. But if all the rest believe it too....

STRANGER. No one believes it now.

LADY. It says in the paper to-day that gold's been made in England. That
it's been proved possible.

STRANGER. You've been deceived.

LADY. No! Oh, heaven, he won't believe his own good fortune.

STRANGER. I no longer believe anything.

LADY. Get the newspaper from the pocket of my dress over there.

STRANGER. The green witch's dress, that laid a spell on me one Sunday
afternoon, between the inn and the church door! That'll bring no good.

LADY (fetching the paper herself and also a large parcel that is in the
pocket of the dress). See for yourself.

STRANGER (tearing up the paper). No need for me to look!

LADY. He won't believe it. He won't. Yet the chemists want to give a
banquet in your honour next Saturday.

STRANGER. Is that in the paper too? About the banquet?

LADY (handing him the packet). And here's the diploma of honour. Read
it!

STRANGER (tearing up the packet). Perhaps there's a Government Order
too!

LADY. Those whom the gods would destroy they first make blind! You
made your discovery with no good intentions, and therefore you weren't
permitted to be the only one to succeed.

STRANGER. Now I shall go. For I won't stay here and lay bare my shame!
I've become a laughing-stock, so I'll go and hide myself--bury myself
alive, because I don't dare to die.

LADY. Then go! We start for the colonies in a few days.

STRANGER. That's frank at least! Perhaps we're nearing a solution.

LADY. Of the riddle: why we had to meet?

STRANGER. Why did we have to?

LADY. To torture one another.

STRANGER. Is that all?

LADY. You thought you could save me from a werewolf, who really was no
such thing, and so you become one yourself. And then I was to save you
from evil by taking all the evil in you on myself, and I did so; but the
result was that you only became more evil. My poor deliverer! Now you're
bound hand and foot and no magician can set you free.

STRANGER. Farewell, and thank you for all you've done.

LADY. Farewell, and thank you... for this! (She points to the cradle.)

STRANGER (going towards the back). First perhaps I ought to take my
leave in there.

LADY. Yes, my dear. Do!

(The STRANGER goes out through the door at the back. The LADY crosses
to the door on the right and lets in the DOMINICAN--who is also the
BEGGAR.)

CONFESSOR. Is he ready now?

LADY. Nothing remains for this unhappy man but to leave the world and
bury himself in a monastery.

CONFESSOR. So he doesn't believe he's the great inventor he undoubtedly
is?

LADY. No. He can believe good of no one, not even of himself.

CONFESSOR. That is the punishment Heaven sent him: to believe lies,
because he wouldn't listen to the truth.

LADY. Lighten his guilty burden for him, if you can.

CONFESSOR. No. If I did he'd only grow insolent and accuse God of
malice and injustice. This man is a demon, who must be kept confined.
He belongs to the dangerous race of rebels; he'd misuse his gifts, if he
could, to do evil. And men's power for evil is immeasurable.

LADY. For the sake of the... attachment you've shown me, can't you ease
his burden a little; where it presses on him most and where he's least
to blame?

CONFESSOR. You must do that, not I; so that he can leave you in the
belief that you've a good side, and that you're not what your first
husband told him you were. If he believes you, I'll deliver him later,
just as I once bound him when he confessed to me, during his illness, in
the convent of St. Saviour's.

LADY (going to the back and opening the door). As you wish!

STRANGER (re-entering). So there's the Terrible One! How did he come
here? But isn't he the beggar, after all?

CONFESSOR. Yes, I am your terrible friend, and I've come for you.

STRANGER. What? Have I...?

CONFESSOR. Yes. Once already you promised me your soul, on oath, when
you lay ill and felt near madness. It was then you offered to serve the
powers of good; but when you got well again you broke your oath, and
therefore were plagued with unrest, and wandered abroad unable to find
peace--tortured by your own conscience.

STRANGER. Who are you really? Who dares lay a hand on my destiny?

CONFESSOR. You must ask her that.

LADY. This is the man to whom I was first engaged, and who dedicated his
life to the service of God, when I left him.

STRANGER. Even if he were!

LADY. So you needn't think so ill of yourself because it was you who
punished my faithlessness and another's lack of conscience.

STRANGER. His sin cannot justify mine. Of course it's untrue, like
everything else; and you only say it to console me.

CONFESSOR. What an unhappy soul he is....

STRANGER. A damned one too!

CONFESSOR. No! (To the LADY.) Say something good of him.

LADY. He won't believe it, if I do; he only believes evil!

CONFESSOR. Then I shall have to say it. A beggar once came and asked him
for a drink of water; but he gave me wine instead and let me sit at his
table. You remember that?

STRANGER. No. I don't load my memory with such trifles.

CONFESSOR. Pride! Pride!

STRANGER. Call it pride, if you like. It's the last vestige of our
god-like origin. Let's go, before it grows dark.

CONFESSOR. 'For the whole world shined with clear light and none were
hindered in their labour. Over these only was spread a heavy night, an
image of darkness which should afterward receive them; but yet were they
unto themselves more grievous than the darkness.'

LADY. Don't hurt him!

STRANGER (with passion). How beautifully she can speak, though she is
evil. Look at her eyes; they cannot weep tears, but they can flatter,
sting, or lie! And yet she says: Don't hurt him! See, now she fears I'll
wake her child, the little monster that robbed me of her! Come, priest,
before I change my mind.

Curtain.




PART III.


CHARACTERS

     THE STRANGER
     THE LADY
     THE CONFESSOR
     THE MAGISTRATE
     THE PRIOR
     THE TEMPTER
     THE DAUGHTER


     less important figures
     HOSTESS
     FIRST VOICE
     SECOND VOICE
     WORSHIPPERS OF VENUS
     MAIA
     PILGRIM
     FATHER
     WOMAN
     EVE
     PRIOR
     PATER ISIDOR (the Doctor of Part I)
     PATER CLEMENS
     PATER MELCHER


SCENES

     ACT I     On the River Bank

     ACT II    Cross-Roads in the Mountains

     ACT III   SCENE I Terrace
               SCENE II Rocky Landscape
               SCENE III Small House
     (On the Mountain where the Monastery Stands)

     ACT IV    SCENE I Chapter House
               SCENE II Picture Gallery
               SCENE III Chapel
     (Of the Monastery)




ACT I

ON THE RIVER BANK

[The foreground represents the bank of a large river. On the right a
projecting tongue of land covered with old willow trees. Farther
up stage the river can be seen flowing quietly past. The background
represents the farther bank, a steep mountain slope covered with
woodland. Above the tops of the forest trees the Monastery can be seen;
it is an enormous four-cornered building completely white, with two rows
of small windows. The façade is broken by the Church belonging to the
Monastery, which is flanked by two towers in the style favoured by the
Jesuits. The Church door is open, and at a certain moment the monstrance
on the altar is visible in the light of the sun. On the near bank in the
foreground, which is low and sandy, purple and yellow loose-strife are
growing. A shallow boat is moored nearby. On the left the ferryman's
hut. It is an evening in early summer and the sun is low; foreground,
river and the lower part of the background lie in shadow; and the trees
on the far bank sway gently in the breeze. Only the Monastery is lit by
the sun.]

[The STRANGER and the CONFESSOR enter from the right. The STRANGER is
wearing alpine clothing: a brown cloak with a cape and hood; he has a
staff and wallet. He is limping slightly. The CONFESSOR is to the black
and white habit of the Dominicans. They stop at a place where a willow
tree prevents any view of the Monastery.]

STRANGER. Why do you lead me along this winding, hilly path, that never
comes to an end?

CONFESSOR. Such is the way, my friend. But now we'll soon be there. (He
leads the STRANGER farther up stage. The STRANGER sees the Monastery,
and is enchanted by it; he takes off his hat, and puts down his wallet
and staff.) Well?

STRANGER. I've never seen anything so white on this polluted earth. At
most, only in my dreams! Yes, that's my youthful dream of a house in
which peace and purity should dwell. A blessing on you, white house! Now
I've come home!

CONFESSOR. Good! But first we must await the pilgrims on this bank. It's
called the bank of farewell, because it's the custom to say farewell
here, before the ferryman ferries one across.

STRANGER. Haven't I said enough farewells already? Wasn't my whole life
one thorny path of farewells? At post offices, steamer-quays, railway
stations--with the waving of handkerchiefs damp with tears?

CONFESSOR. Yet your voice trembles with the pain what you've lost.

STRANGER. I don't feel I've lost anything. I don't want anything back.

CONFESSOR. Not even your youth?

STRANGER. That least of all. What should I do with it, and its capacity
for suffering?

CONFESSOR. And for enjoyment?

STRANGER. I never enjoyed anything, for I was born with a thorn in my
flesh; every time I stretched out my hand to grasp a pleasure, I pricked
my finger and Satan struck me in the face.

CONFESSOR. Because your pleasures have been base ones.

STRANGER. Not so base. I had my own home, a wife, children, duties,
obligations to others! No, I was born in disfavour, a step-child of
life; and I was pursued, hunted, in a word, cursed!

CONFESSOR. Because you didn't obey God's commandment.

STRANGER. But no one can, as St. Paul says himself! Why should I be able
to do what no one else can do? I of all men? Because I'm supposed to be
a scoundrel. Because more's demanded of me than of others.... (Crying
out.) Because I was treated with injustice.

CONFESSOR. Have you got back to that, rebellious one?

STRANGER. Yes. I've always been there. Now let's cross the river.

CONFESSOR. Do you think one can climb up to that white house without
preparation?

STRANGER. I'm ready: you can examine me.

CONFESSOR. Good! The first monastic vow is: humility.

STRANGER. And the second: obedience! Neither of them was ever a special
virtue of mine; it's for that very reason that I want to make the great
attempt.

CONFESSOR. And show your pride through your humility.

STRANGER. Whatever it is, it's all the same to me.

CONFESSOR. What, everything? The world and its best gifts; the joy of
innocent children, the pleasant warmth of home, the approbation of your
fellow-men, the satisfaction brought by the fulfilment of duty--are you
indifferent to them all?

STRANGER. Yes! Because I was born without the power of enjoyment. There
have been moments when I've been an object of envy; but I've never
understood what it was I was envied for: my sufferings in misfortune, my
lack of peace in success, or the fact I hadn't long to live.

CONFESSOR. It's true that life has given you everything you wished; even
a little gold at the last. Why, I even seem to remember that a sculptor
was commissioned to make a portrait bust of you.

STRANGER. Oh yes! A bust was made of me.

CONFESSOR. Are you, of all men, impressed by such things?

STRANGER. Of course not! But they do at least mark well founded
appreciation, that neither envy nor lack of understanding can shake.

CONFESSOR. You think so? It seems to me that human greatness resides
in the good opinion of others; and that, if this opinion changes, the
greatest can quickly dwindle into nothing.

STRANGER. The opinions of others have never meant much to me.

CONFESSOR. Haven't they? Really?

STRANGER. No one's been so strict with himself as I! And no one's been
so humble! All have demanded my respect; whilst they spurned me and spat
on me. And when at last I found I'd duties towards the immortal soul
given into my keeping, I began to demand respect for this immortal soul.
Then I was branded as the proudest of the proud! And by whom? By the
proudest of all amongst the humble and lowly.

CONFESSOR. I think you're entangling yourself in contradictions.

STRANGER. I think so, too! For the whole of life consists of nothing
but contradictions. The rich are the poor in spirit; the many little men
hold the power, and the great only serve the little men. I've never met
such proud people as the humble; I've never met an uneducated man who
didn't believe himself in a position to criticise learning and to do
without it. I've found the unpleasantest of deadly sins amongst the
Saints: I mean self-complacency. In my youth I was a saint myself; but
I've never been so worthless as I was then. The better I thought myself,
the worse I became.

CONFESSOR. Then what do you seek here?

STRANGER. What I've told you already; but I'll add this: I'm seeking
death without the need to die!

CONFESSOR. The mortification of your flesh, of your old self! Good! Now
keep still: the pilgrims are coming on their wooden rafts to celebrate
the festival of Corpus Christi.

STRANGER (looking to the right in surprise). Who are they?

CONFESSOR. People who believe in something.

STRANGER. Then help my unbelief! (Sunlight now falls on the monstrance
in the church above, so that it shines like a window pane at sunset.)
Has the sun entered the church, or....

CONFESSOR. Yes. The sun has entered....

(The first raft comes in from the right. Children clothed in white, with
garlands on their heads and with lighted lanterns in their hands, are
seen standing round an altar decked with flowers, on which a white flag
with a golden lily has been planted. They sing, whilst the raft glides
slowly by.)

    Blessèd be he, who fears the Lord,
    Beati omnes, qui timent Dominum,
    And walks in his ways,
    Qui ambulant in viis ejus.
    Thou shalt feed thyself with the work of thy hands,
    Labores manuum tuarum quia manducabis;
    Blessèd be thou and peace be with thee,
    Beatus es et bene tibi erit.

(A second raft appears with boys on one side and girls on the other. It
has a flag with a rose on it.)

            Thy wife shall be like a fruitful vine,
            Uxor tua sicut vitis abundans,
            Within thy house,
            In lateribus domus tuae.

(The third raft carries men and women. There is a flag with fruit upon
it: figs, grapes, pomegranates, melons, ears of wheat, etc.)

    Filii tui sicut novellae olivarum,
    Thy children shall be like olive branches about thy table,
    In circuitu mensae tuae.

(The fourth raft is filled with older men and women. The flag has a
representation of a fir-tree under snow.)

            See, how blessèd is the man,
            Ecce sic benedicetur homo,
            Who feareth the Lord,
            Qui timet Dominum!

(The raft glides by.)

STRANGER. What were they singing?

CONFESSOR. A pilgrim's song.

STRANGER. Who wrote it?

CONFESSOR. A royal person.

STRANGER. Here? What was his name? Has he written anything else?

CONFESSOR. About fifty songs; he was called David, the son of Isaiah!
But he didn't always write psalms. When he was young, he did other
things. Yes. Such things will happen!

STRANGER. Can we go on now?

CONFESSOR. In a moment. I've something to say to you first.

STRANGER. Speak.

CONFESSOR. Good. But don't be either sad or angry.

STRANGER. Certainly not.

CONFESSOR. Here, you see, on this bank, you're a well-known--let's say
famous--person; but over there, on the other, you'll be quite unknown to
the brothers. Nothing more, in fact, than an ordinary simple man.

STRANGER. Oh! Don't they read in the monastery?

CONFESSOR. Nothing light; only serious books.

STRANGER. They take in papers, I suppose?

CONFESSOR. Not the kind that write about you!

STRANGER. Then on the other side of this river my life-work doesn't
exist?

CONFESSOR. What work?

STRANGER. I see. Very well. Can't we cross now?

CONFESSOR. In a minute. Is there no one you'd like to take leave of?

STRANGER (after a pause.) Yes. But it's beyond the bounds of
possibility.

CONFESSOR. Have you ever seen anything impossible?

STRANGER. Not really, since I've seen my own destiny.

CONFESSOR. Well, who is it you'd like to meet?

STRANGER. I had a daughter once; I called her Sylvia, because she sang
all day long like a wren. It's some years since I saw her; she must be
a girl of sixteen now. But I'm afraid if I were to meet her, life would
regain its value for me.

CONFESSOR. You fear nothing else?

STRANGER. What do you mean?

CONFESSOR. That she may have changed!

STRANGER. She could only have changed for the better.

CONFESSOR. Are you sure?

STRANGER. Yes.

CONFESSOR. She'll come to you. (He goes down to the bank and beckons to
the right.)

STRANGER. Wait! I'm wondering whether it's wise!

CONFESSOR. It can do no harm.

(He beckons once more. A boat appears on the river, rowed by a young
girl. She is wearing summer clothing, her head is bare and her fair hair
is hanging loose. She gets out of the boat behind the willow tree. The
CONFESSOR draws back until he is near the ferryman's hut, but remains
in sight of the audience. The STRANGER has waved to the girl and she has
answered him. She now comes on to the stage, runs into the STRANGER'S
arms, and kisses him.)

DAUGHTER. Father. My dear father!

STRANGER. Sylvia! My child!

DAUGHTER. How in the world do you come to be up here in the mountains?

STRANGER. And how have _you_ got here? I thought I'd managed to hide so
well.

DAUGHTER. Why did you want to hide?

STRANGER. Ask me as little as possible! You've grown into a big girl.
And I've gone grey.

DAUGHTER. No. You're not grey. You're just as young as you were when we
parted.

STRANGER. When we... parted!

DAUGHTER. When you left us.... (The STRANGER does not reply.) Aren't you
glad we're meeting again?

STRANGER (faintly). Yes!

DAUGHTER. Then show it.

STRANGER. How can I be glad, when we're parting to-day for life?

DAUGHTER. Why, where do you want to go?

STRANGER (pointing to the monastery). Up there!

DAUGHTER (with a sophisticated air). Into the monastery? Yes, now I come
to think of it, perhaps it's best.

STRANGER. You think so?

DAUGHTER (with pity, but good-will.) I mean, if you've a ruined life
behind you.... (Coaxingly.) Now you look sad. Tell me one thing.

STRANGER. Tell _me_ one thing, my child, that's been worrying me more
than anything else. You've a stepfather?

DAUGHTER. Yes.

STRANGER. Well?

DAUGHTER. He's very good and kind.

STRANGER. With every virtue that I lack....

DAUGHTER. Aren't you glad we've got into better hands?

STRANGER. Good, better, best! Why do you come here bare-headed?

DAUGHTER. Because George is carrying my hat.

STRANGER. Who's George? And where is he?

DAUGHTER. George is a friend of mine; and he's waiting for me on the
bank down below.

STRANGER. Are you engaged to him?

DAUGHTER. No. Certainly not!

STRANGER. Do you want to marry?

DAUGHTER. Never!

STRANGER. I can see it by your mottled cheeks, like those of a child
that has got up too early; I can hear it by your voice, that's no longer
that of a warbler, but a jay; I can feel it in your kisses, that burn
cold like the sun in May; and by your steady icy look that tells me
you're nursing a secret of which you're ashamed, but of which you'd like
to boast. And your brothers and sisters?

DAUGHTER. They're quite well, thank you.

STRANGER. Have we anything else to say to one another?

DAUGHTER (coldly). Perhaps not.

STRANGER. Now you look so like your mother.

DAUGHTER. How do you know, when you've never been able to see her as she
was!

STRANGER. So you understood that, though you were so young?

DAUGHTER. I learnt to understand it from you. If only you'd understand
yourself.

STRANGER. Have you anything else to teach me?

DAUGHTER. Perhaps! But in your day that wasn't considered seemly.

STRANGER. My day's over and exists no longer; just as Sylvia exists no
longer, but is merely a name, a memory. (He takes a guide-book out of
his pocket.) Look at this guide-book! Can you see small marks made here
by tiny fingers, and others by little damp lips? You made them when you
were five years old; you were sitting on my knee in the train, and we
saw the Alps for the first time. You thought what you saw was Heaven;
and when I explained that the mountain was the Jungfrau, you asked if
you could kiss the name in the book.

DAUGHTER. I don't remember that!

STRANGER. Delightful memories pass, but hateful ones remain! Don't you
remember anything about me?

DAUGHTER. Oh yes.

STRANGER. Quiet! I know what you mean. One night... one dreadful,
horrible night... Sylvia, my child, when I shut my eyes I see a pale
little angel, who slept in my arms when she was ill; and who thanked
me when I gave her a present. Where is she whom I long for so and
who exists no more, although she isn't dead? You, as you are, seem a
stranger, whom I've never known and certainly don't long to see
again. If Sylvia at least were dead and lay in her grave, there'd be a
churchyard where I could take my flowers.... How strange it is! She's
neither among the living, nor the dead. Perhaps she never existed, and
was only a dream like everything else.

DAUGHTER (wheedling).Father, dear!

STRANGER. It's she! No, only her voice. (Pause.) So you think my life's
been ruined?

DAUGHTER. Yes. But why speak of it now?

STRANGER. Because remember I once saved _your_ life. You had brain fever
for a whole month and suffered a great deal. Your mother wanted the
doctor to deliver you from your unhappy existence by some powerful drug.
But I prevented it, and so saved you from death and your mother from
prison.

DAUGHTER. I don't believe it!

STRANGER. But a fact may be true, even if you don't believe it.

DAUGHTER. You dreamed it.

STRANGER. Who knows if I haven't dreamed everything, and am not even
dreaming now. How I wish it were so!

DAUGHTER. I must be going, father.

STRANGER. Then good-bye!

DAUGHTER. May I write to you?

STRANGER. What? One of the dead write to another? Letters won't reach
me in future. And I mayn't receive visitors. But I'm glad we've met,
for now there's nothing else on earth I cling to. (Going to the left.)
Good-bye, girl or woman, whatever I should call you. There's no need to
weep!

DAUGHTER. I wasn't thinking of weeping, though I dare say good breeding
would demand I should. Well, good-bye! (She goes out right.)

STRANGER (to the CONFESSOR). I think I came out of that well! It's a
mercy to part with content on both sides. Mankind, after all, makes
rapid progress, and self-control increases as the flow of the tear-ducts
lessens. I've seen so many tears shed in my lifetime, that I'm almost
taken aback at this dryness. She was a strong child, just the kind I
once wished to be. The most beautiful thing that life can offer! She
lay, like an angel, wrapped in the white veils of her cradle, with a
blue coverlet when she slept. Blue and arched like the sky. That was the
best: what will the worst look like?

CONFESSOR. Don't excite yourself, but be of good cheer. First throw away
that foolish guide-book, for this is your last journey.

STRANGER. You mean this? Very well. (He opens the book, kisses one of
the pages and then throws it into the river.) Anything else?

CONFESSOR. If you've any gold or silver, you must give it to the poor.

STRANGER. I've a silver watch. I never got as far as a gold one.

CONFESSOR. Give that to the ferryman; and then you'll get a glass of
wine.

STRANGER. The last! It's like an execution! Perhaps I'll have to have my
hair cut, too?

CONFESSOR. Yes. Later. (He takes the watch and goes to the door of the
ferryman's hut, speaking a few whispered words to someone within. He
receives a bottle of wine and a glass in exchange, which he puts on the
table.)

STRANGER (filling his glass, but not drinking it.) Shall I never get
wine up there?

CONFESSOR. No wine; and you'll see no women. You may hear singing; but
not the kind of songs that go with women and wine.

STRANGER. I've had enough of women; they can't tempt me any more.

CONFESSOR. Are you sure?

STRANGER. Quite sure.... But tell me this: what do you think of women,
who mayn't even set their feet within your consecrated walls?

CONFESSOR. So you're still asking questions?

STRANGER. And why may an abbess never hear confession, never read mass,
and never preach?

CONFESSOR. I can't answer that.

STRANGER. Because the answer would accord with my thoughts on that
theme.

CONFESSOR. It wouldn't be a disaster if we were to agree for once.

STRANGER. Not at all!

CONFESSOR. Now drink up your wine.

STRANGER. No. I only want to look at it for the last time. It's
beautiful....

CONFESSOR. Don't lose yourself in meditation; memories lie at the bottom
of the cup.

STRANGER. And oblivion, and songs, and power--imaginary power, but for
that reason all the greater.

CONFESSOR. Wait here a moment; I'll go and order the ferry.

STRANGER. 'Sh! I can hear singing, and I can see.... I can see.... For
a moment I saw a flag unfurling in a puff of wind, only to fall back
on the flagstaff and hang there limply as if it were nothing but a
dishcloth. I've witnessed my whole life flashing past in a second,
with its joys and sorrows, its beauty and its misery! But now I can see
nothing.

CONFESSOR (going to the left). Wait here a moment, I'll go and order the
ferry.

(The STRANGER goes so far up stage that the rays of the setting sun,
which are streaming from the right through the trees, throw his shadow
across the bank and the river. The LADY enters from the right, in deep
mourning. Her shadow slowly approaches that of the STRANGER.)

STRANGER (who, to begin with, looks only at his own shadow). Ah! The
sun! It makes me a bloodless shape, a giant, who can walk on the water
of the river, climb the mountain, stride over the roof of the monastery
church, and rise, as he does now, up into the firmament--up to the
stars. Ah, now I'm up here with the stars.... (He notices the shadow
thrown by the LADY.) But who's following me? Who's interrupting my
ascension? Trying to climb on my shoulders? (Turning.) You!

LADY. Yes. I!

STRANGER. So black! So black and so evil.

LADY. No longer evil. I'm in mourning....

STRANGER. For whom?

LADY. For our Mizzi.

STRANGER. My daughter! (The LADY opens her arms, in order to throw
herself on to his breast, but he avoids her.) I congratulate the dead
child. I'm sorry for you. I myself feel outside everything.

LADY. Comfort me, too.

STRANGER. A fine idea! I'm to comfort my fury, weep with my hangman,
amuse my tormentor.

LADY. Have you no feelings?

STRANGER. None! I wasted the feelings I used to have on you and others.

LADY. You're right. You can reproach me.

STRANGER. I've neither the time nor the wish to do that. Where are you
going?

LADY. I want to cross with the ferry.

STRANGER. Then I've no luck, for I wanted to do the same. (The LADY
weeps into her handkerchief. The STRANGER takes it from her and dries
her eyes.) Dry your eyes, child, and be yourself! As hard, and lacking
in feeling, as you really are! (The LADY tries to put her arm round his
neck. The STRANGER taps her gently on the fingers.) You mustn't touch
me. When your words and glances weren't enough, you always wanted to
touch me. You'll excuse a rather trivial question: are you hungry?

LADY. No. Thank you.

STRANGER. But you're tired. Sit down. (The LADY sits down at the table.
The STRANGER throws the bottle and glass into the river.) Well, what are
you going to live for now?

LADY (sadly). I don't know.

STRANGER. Where will you go?

LADY (sobbing). I don't know.

STRANGER. So you're in despair? You see no reason for living and no end
to your misery! How like me you are! What a pity there's no monastery
for both sexes, so that we could pair off together. Is the werewolf
still alive?

LADY. You mean...?

STRANGER. Your first husband.

LADY. He never seems to die.

STRANGER. Like a certain worm! (Pause.) And now that we're so far from
the world and its pettiness, tell me this: why did you leave him in
those days, and come to me?

LADY. Because I loved you.

STRANGER. And how long did that last?

LADY. Until I read your book, and the child was born.

STRANGER. And then?

LADY. I hated you! That is, I wanted to be rid of all the evil you'd
given me, but I couldn't.

STRANGER. So that's how it was! But we'll never really know the truth.

LADY. Have you noticed how impossible it is to find things out? You can
live with a person and their relations for twenty years, and yet not
know anything about them.

STRANGER. So you've discovered that? As you see so much, tell me this:
how was it you came to love me?

LADY. I don't know; but I'll try to remember. (Pause.) Well, you had
the masculine courage to be rude to a lady. In me you sought the
companionship of a human being and not merely of a woman. That honoured
me; and, I thought, you too.

STRANGER. Tell me also whether you held me to be a misogynist?

LADY. A woman-hater? Every healthy man is one, in the secret places of
his heart; and all perverted men are admirers of women.

STRANGER. You're not trying to flatter me, are you?

LADY. A woman who'd try to flatter a man's not normal.

STRANGER. I see you've thought a great deal!

LADY. Thinking's the least I've done; for when I've thought least
I've understood most. Besides, what I said just how is perhaps only
improvised, as you call it, and not true in the least.

STRANGER. But if it agrees with many of my observations it becomes most
probable. (The LADY weeps into her handkerchief.) You're weeping again?

LADY. I was thinking of Mizzi. The loveliest thing we ever had is gone.

STRANGER. No. You were the loveliest thing, when you sat all night
watching over your child, who was lying in your bed, because her cradle
was too cold! (Three loud knocks are heard on the ferryman's door.) 'Sh!

LADY. What's that?

STRANGER. My companion, who's waiting for me.

LADY (continuing the conversation). I never thought life would give me
anything so sweet as a child.

STRANGER. And at the same time anything so bitter.

LADY. Why bitter?

STRANGER. You've been a child yourself, and you must remember how we,
when we'd just married, came to your mother in rags, dirty and without
money. I seem to remember she didn't find us very sweet.

LADY. That's true.

STRANGER. And I... well, just now I met Sylvia. And I expected that all
that was beautiful and good in the child would have blossomed in the
girl....

LADY. Well?

STRANGER. I found a faded rose, that seemed to have blown too soon. Her
breasts were sunken, her hair untidy like that of a neglected child, and
her teeth decayed.

LADY. Oh!

STRANGER. You mustn't grieve. Not for the child! You might perhaps have
had to grieve for her later, as I did.

LADY. So that's what life is?

STRANGER. Yes. That's what life is. And that's why I'm going to bury
myself alive.

LADY. Where?

STRANGER (pointing to the monastery). Up there!

LADY. In the monastery? No, don't leave me. Bear me company. I'm so
alone in the world and so poor, so poor! When the child died, my mother
turned me out, and ever since I've been living in an attic with a
dressmaker. At first she was kind and pleasant, but then the lonely
evenings got too long for her, and she went out in search of company--so
we parted. Now I'm on the road, and I've nothing but the clothes I'm
wearing; nothing but my grief. I eat it and drink it; it nourishes me
and sends me to sleep. I'd rather lose anything in the world than that!
(The STRANGER weeps.) You're weeping. You! Let me kiss your eyelids.

STRANGER. You've suffered all that for my sake!

LADY. Not for your sake! You never did me an ill turn; but I plagued you
till you left your fireside and your child!

STRANGER. I'd forgotten that; but if you say so.... So you still love
me?

LADY. Probably. I don't know.

STRANGER. And you'd like to begin all over again?

LADY. All over again? The quarrels? No, we won't do that.

STRANGER. You're right. The quarrels would only begin all over again.
And yet it's difficult to part.

LADY. To part. The word alone's terrible enough.

STRANGER. Then what are we to do?

LADY. I don't know.

STRANGER. No, one knows nothing, hardly even that one knows nothing; and
that's why, you see, I've got as far as to _believe_.

LADY. How do you know you can believe, if belief's a gift?

STRANGER. You can receive a gift, if you ask for it.

LADY. Oh yes, if you ask; but I've never been able to beg.

STRANGER. I've had to learn to. Why can't you?

LADY. Because one has to demean oneself first.

STRANGER. Life does that for one very well.

LADY. Mizzi, Mizzi, Mizzi!... (She has taken a shawl she was carrying
over her arm, rolled it up and put it on her knee like a baby in long
clothes.) Sleep! Sleep! Sleep! Think of it! I can see her here! She's
smiling at me; but she's dressed in black; she seems to be in mourning
too! How stupid I am! Her mother's in mourning! She's got two teeth
down below, and they're white--milk teeth; she should never have cut any
others. Oh, can't you see her, when I can? It's no vision. It _is_ her!

CONFESSOR (in the door of the ferryman's hut; sternly to the STRANGER).
Come. Everything's ready!

STRANGER. No. Not yet. I must first set my house in order; and look
after this woman, who was once my wife.

CONFESSOR. Oh, so you want to stay!

STRANGER. No. I don't want to stay; but I can't leave duties behind me
unfulfilled. This woman's on the road, deserted, without a home, without
money!

CONFESSOR. What has that to do with us? Let the dead bury their dead!

STRANGER. Is that your teaching?

CONFESSOR. No, yours.... Mine, on the other hand, commands me to send a
Sister of Mercy here, to look after this unhappy one, who... who... The
Sister will soon be here!

STRANGER. I shall count on it.

CONFESSOR (taking the STRANGER by the hand and drawing him away.) Then
come!

STRANGER (in despair). Oh, God in heaven! Help us every one!

CONFESSOR. Amen!

(The LADY, who has not been looking at the CONFESSOR and the STRANGER,
now raises her eyes and glances at the STRANGER as if she wanted to
spring up and hold him back; but she is prevented by the imaginary child
she has put to her breast.)

Curtain.




ACT II

CROSS-ROADS IN THE MOUNTAINS

[A cross-roads high up in the mountains. On the right, huts. On the left
a small pool, round which invalids are sitting. Their clothes are blue
and their hands cinnabar-red. From the pond blue vapour and small blue
flames rise now and then. Whenever this happens the invalids put them
hands to their mouths and cough. The background is formed by a mountain
covered with pine-wood, which is obscured above by a stationary bank of
mist.]

[The STRANGER is sitting at a table outside one of the huts. The
CONFESSOR comes forward from the right.]

STRANGER. At last!

CONFESSOR. What do you mean: at last?

STRANGER. You left me here a week ago and told me to wait till you came
back.

CONFESSOR. Hadn't I prepared you for the fact that the way to the white
house up there would be long and difficult.

STRANGER. I don't deny it. How far have we come?

CONFESSOR. Five hundred yards. We've still got fifteen hundred.

STRANGER. But where's the sun?

CONFESSOR. Up there, above the clouds....

STRANGER. Then we shall have to go through them?

CONFESSOR. Yes. Of course.

STRANGER. What are those patients doing there? What a company! And why
are their hands so red?

CONFESSOR. For both our sakes I want to avoid using impure words, so
I'll speak in pleasant riddles, which you, as a writer, will understand.

STRANGER. Yes. Speak beautifully. There's so much that's ugly here.

CONFESSOR. You may have noticed that the signs given to the planets
correspond with those of certain metals? Good! Then you'll have seen
that Venus is represented by a mirror. This mirror was originally made
of copper, so that copper was called Venus and bore her stamp. But now
the reverse of Venus' mirror is covered with quicksilver or mercury!

STRANGER. The reverse of Venus... is Mercury. Oh!

CONFESSOR. Quicksilver is therefore the reverse side of Venus.
Quicksilver is itself as bright as a calm sea, as a lake at the height
of summer; but when mercury meets firestone and burns, it blushes and
turns red like newly-shed blood, like the cloth on the scaffold, like
the cinnabar lips of the whore! Do you understand now, or not?

STRANGER. Wait a moment! Cinnabar is quicksilver and sulphur.

CONFESSOR. Yes. Mercury must be burnt, if it comes too near to Venus!
Have we said enough now?

STRANGER. So these are sulphur springs?

CONFESSOR. Yes. And the sulphur flames purify or burn everything rotten!
So when the source of life's grown tainted, one is sent to the sulphur
springs....

STRANGER. How does the source of life grow tainted?

CONFESSOR. When Aphrodite, born of the pure seafoam, wallows in the
mire.... When Aphrodite Urania, the heaven-born, degrades herself to
Pandemos, the Venus of the streets.

STRANGER. Why is desire born?

CONFESSOR. Pure desire, to be satisfied; impure, to be stifled.

STRANGER. What is pure, and what impure?

CONFESSOR. Have you got back to that?

STRANGER. Ask these men here....

CONFESSOR. Take care! (He looks at the STRANGER, who is unable to
support his gaze.)

STRANGER. You're choking me.... My chest....

CONFESSOR. Yes, I'll steal the air you use to form rebellious words, and
ask outrageous questions. Sit down there, I'll come back--when you've
learnt patience and undergone your probation. But don't forget that I
can hear and see you, and am aware of you, wherever I may be!

STRANGER. So I'm to be tested! I'm glad to know it!

CONFESSOR. But you mustn't speak to the worshippers of Venus.

(MAIA, an old woman, appears in the background.)

STRANGER (rising in horror). Who am I meeting here after all this time?
Who is it?

CONFESSOR. Who are you speaking of?

STRANGER. That old woman there?

CONFESSOR. Who's she?

STRANGER (calling). Maia! Listen! (Old Maia has disappeared. The
STRANGER hurries after her.) Maia, my friend, listen! She's gone!

CONFESSOR. Who was it?

STRANGER (sitting down). O God! Now, when I find her again at last,
she goes.... I've looked for her for seven long years, written letters,
advertised....

CONFESSOR. Why?

STRANGER. I'll tell you how her fate was linked to mine! (Pause.) Maia
was the nurse in my first family... during those hard years... when I
was fighting the Invisible Ones, who wouldn't bless my work! I wrote
till my brain and nerves dissolved like fat in alcohol... but it wasn't
enough! I was one of those who never could earn enough. And the day came
when I couldn't pay the maids their wages--it was terrible--and I became
the servant of my servant, and she became my mistress. At last... in
order, at least, to save my soul, I fled from what was too powerful for
me. I fled into the wilderness, where I collected my spirit in solitude
and recovered my strength! My first thought then was--my debts! For
seven years I looked for Maia, but in vain! For seven years I saw her
shadow, out of the windows of trains, from the decks of steamers, in
strange towns, in distant lands, but without ever being able to find
her. I dreamed of her for seven years; and whenever I drank a glass
of wine I blushed at the thought of old Maia, who perhaps was drinking
water in a poorhouse! I tried to give the sum I owed her to the poor;
but it was no use. And now--she's found and lost in the same moment!
(He gets up and goes towards the back as if searching for her.) Explain
this, if you can! I want to pay my debt; I can pay it now, but I'm not
allowed to.

CONFESSOR. Foolishness' Bow to what seems inexplicable; you'll see that
the explanation will come later. Farewell!

STRANGER. Later. Everything comes later.

CONFESSOR. Yes. If it doesn't come at once! (He goes out. The LADY
enters pensively and sits down at the table, opposite the STRANGER.)

STRANGER. What? You back again? The same and not the same? How beautiful
you've grown; as beautiful as you were the first time I ever saw you;
when I asked if I might be your friend, your dog.

LADY. That you can see beauty I don't possess shows that once more
you have a mirror of beauty in your eye. The werewolf never thought me
beautiful, for he'd nothing beautiful with which to see me.

STRANGER. Why did you kiss me that day? What made you do it?

LADY. You've often asked me that, and I've never been able to find the
answer, because I don't know. But just now, when I was away from you,
here in the mountains, where the air's purer and the sun nearer....
Hush! Now I can see that Sunday afternoon, when you sat on that seat
like a lost and helpless child, with a broken look in your eyes, and
stared at your own destiny.... A maternal feeling I'd never known before
welled up in me then, and I was overcome with pity, pity for a human
soul--so that I forgot myself.

STRANGER. I'm ashamed. Now I believe it was so.

LADY. But you took it another way. You thought...

STRANGER. Don't tell me. I'm ashamed.

LADY. Why did you think so badly of me? Didn't you notice that I drew
down my veil; so that it was between us, like the knight's sword in the
bridal bed....

STRANGER. I'm ashamed. I attributed my evil thoughts to you. Ingeborg,
you were made of better stuff than I. I'm ashamed!

LADY. Now you look handsome. How handsome!

STRANGER. Oh no. Not I. You!

LADY (ecstatically). No, you! Yes, now I've seen through the mask
and the false beard. Now I can see the man you hid from me, the man I
thought I'd found in you... the man I was always searching for. I've
often thought you a hypocrite; but we're no hypocrites. No, no, we can't
pretend.

STRANGER. Ingeborg, now we're on the other side of the river, and have
life beneath us, behind us... how different everything seems. Now, now,
I can see your soul; the ideal, the angel, who was imprisoned in the
flesh because of sin. So there is an Above, and an Earlier Age. When
we began it wasn't the beginning, and it won't be the end when we are
ended. Life is a fragment, without beginning or end! That's why it's so
difficult to make head or tail of it.

LADY (kindly). So difficult. So difficult. Tell me, for instance--now
we're beyond guilt or innocence--how was it you came to hate women?

STRANGER. Let me think! To hate women? Hate them? I never hated them. On
the contrary! Ever since I was eight years old I've always had some love
affair, preferably an innocent one. And I've loved like a volcano three
times! But wait--I've always felt that women hated me... and they've
always tortured me.

LADY. How strange!

STRANGER. Let me think about it a little.... Perhaps I've been jealous
of my own personality; and been afraid of being influenced too much. My
first love made herself into a sort of governess and nurse to me. But,
of course, there _are_ men who detest children; who detest women too, if
they're superior to them, that is!

LADY (amiably). But you've called women the enemies of mankind. Did you
mean it?

STRANGER. Of course I meant it, if I wrote it! For I wrote out of
experience, not theory.... In woman I sought an angel, who could lend
me wings, and I fell into the arms of an earth-spirit, who suffocated me
under mattresses stuffed with the feathers of wings! I sought an Ariel
and I found a Caliban; when I wanted to rise she dragged me down; and
continually reminded me of the fall....

LADY (kindly). Solomon knew much of women; do you know what he said? 'I
find more bitter than death a woman, whose heart is snares and nets and
her hands as bands; whoso pleaseth God shall escape from her; but the
sinner shall be taken by her.'

STRANGER. I was never acceptable in God's sight. Was that a punishment?
Perhaps. But I was never acceptable to anyone, and I've never had a good
word addressed to me! Have I never done a good action? Is it possible
for a man never to have done anything good? (Pause.) It's terrible never
to hear any good words about oneself!

LADY. You've heard them. But when people have spoken well of you, you've
refused to listen, as if it hurt you.

STRANGER. That's true, now you remind me. But can you explain it?

LADY. Explain it? You're always asking for explanations of the
inexplicable. 'When I applied my heart to know wisdom... I beheld all
the work of God, that a man cannot find out that is done under the sun.
Because, though a man labour to seek it out, yet he shall not find it;
yea, further, though a wise man think to know it, yet shall he not be
able to find it!'

STRANGER. Who says that?

LADY. The Prophet Ecclesiastes. (She takes a doll out of her pocket.)
This is Mizzi's doll. You see she longs for her little mistress! How
pale she's grown... and she seems to know where Mizzi is, for she's
always gazing up to heaven, whichever way I hold her. Look! Her eyes
follow the stars as the compass the pole. She is my compass and always
shows me where heaven is. She should, of course, be dressed in black,
because she's in mourning; but we're so poor.... Do you know why we
never had money? Because God was angry with us for our sins. 'The
righteous suffer no dearth.'

STRANGER. Where did you learn that?

LADY. In a book in which everything's written. Everything! (She wraps
the doll up in her cloak.) See, she's beginning to get cold--that's
because of the cloud up there....

STRANGER. How can you dare to wander up here in the mountains?

LADY. God is with me; so what have I to fear from human beings?

STRANGER. Aren't you tormented by those people at the pool?

LADY (turning towards them). I can't see them. I can't see anything
horrible now.

STRANGER. Ingeborg! I have made you evil, yet you're on the way to make
me good! It was my dream, you know, to seek redemption through a woman.
You don't believe it! But it's true. In the old days nothing was of
value to me if I couldn't lay it at a woman's feet. Not as a tribute
to an overbearing mistress,... but as a sacrifice to the beautiful
and good. It was my pleasure to give; but she wanted to take and not
receive: that's why she hated me! When I was helpless and thought the
end was near, a desire grew in me to fall asleep on a mother's knee, on
a tremendous breast where I could bury my tired head and drink in the
tenderness I'd been deprived of.

LADY. You had no mother?

STRANGER. Hardly! And I've never felt any bond between myself and my
father or my brothers and sisters.... Ingeborg, I was the son of a
servant of whom it is written. 'Drive forth the handmaid with her son,
for this son shall not inherit with the son of peace.'

LADY. Do you know why Ishmael was driven out? It says just before--that
he was a scoffer. And then it goes on: 'He will be a wild man, his hand
will be against every man, and every man's hand against him; and against
all his brothers.'

STRANGER. Is that also written?

LADY. Oh yes, my child; it's all there!

STRANGER. All?

LADY. All. There you'll find answers to all your questions even the most
inquisitive!

STRANGER. Call me your child, and then I'll love you.... And if I
love anyone, I long to serve them, to obey them, to let myself be
ill-treated, to suffer and to bear it.

LADY. You shouldn't love me, but your Creator.

STRANGER. He's unfriendly--like my father!

LADY. He is Love itself; and you are Hate.

STRANGER. You're his daughter; but I'm his cast-out son.

LADY (coaxingly). Quiet! Be still!

STRANGER. If you only knew what I've suffered this last week. I don't
know where I am.

LADY. Where do you think?

STRANGER. There's a woman in that but who looks at me as if I'd come to
rob her of her last mite. She says nothing--that's the trouble. But I
think it's prayers she mutters, when she sees me.

LADY. What sort of prayers?

STRANGER. The sort one whispers behind the backs of those who have the
evil eye or bring misfortune.

LADY. How strange! Don't you realise that one's sight can be blinded?

STRANGER. Yes, of course. But who can do it?

HOSTESS (coming across to their table). Well, look at that! I suppose
she's your sister?

STRANGER. Yes. We can say so now.

HOSTESS (to the LADY). Fancy meeting someone I can speak to at last!
This gentleman's so silent, you see, that one feels at once one must
respect him; particularly as he seems to have had trouble. But I can
say this to his sister, and he shall hear it: that from the moment
he entered the house I felt that I was blessed. I'd been dogged by
misfortune; I'd no lodger, my only cow had died, my husband was in a
home for drunkards and my children had nothing to eat. I prayed God to
send me help from heaven, because I expected nothing more on earth. Then
this gentleman came. And apart from giving me double what I asked, he
brought me good luck--and my house was blessed. God bless you, good sir!

STRANGER (getting up excitedly). Silence, woman. That's blasphemy!

LADY. He won't believe. O God! He won't believe. Look at me!

STRANGER. When I look at you, I do believe. She's giving me her
blessing! And I, who'm damned, have brought a blessing on her! How can I
believe it? I, of all men! (He falls down by the table and weeps in his
hands.)

LADY. He's weeping! Tears, rain from heaven, that can soften rocks, are
falling on his stony heart.... He's weeping!

HOSTESS. He? Who has a heart of gold! Who's been so open handed and so
good to my children!

LADY. You hear what she says!

HOSTESS. There's only one thing about him I don't understand; but I
don't want to say anything unpleasant....

LADY. What is it?

HOSTESS. Only a trifle; and yet...

LADY. Well?

HOSTESS. He didn't like my dogs.

LADY. I can't blame him for not caring for an impure beast. I hate
everything animal, in myself and others. I don't hate animals on that
account, for I hate nothing that's created....

STRANGER. Thank you, Ingeborg!

LADY. You see! I've an eye for your merits, even though you don't
believe it.... Here comes the Confessor.

(The CONFESSOR enters.)

HOSTESS. Then I'll go; for the Confessor has no love for me.

LADY. The Confessor loves all mankind.

CONFESSOR (coming forward and speaking to the LADY). You best of all, my
child; for you're goodness itself. Whether you're beautiful to look at,
I can't see; but I know you must be, because you're good. Yes, you were
the bride of my youth, and my spiritual mate; and you'll always be so,
for you gave me what you were never able to give to others. I've
lived your life in my spirit, suffered your pains, enjoyed your
pleasures--pleasure rather, for you'd no others than what your child
gave you. I alone have seen the beauty of your soul--my friend here has
divined it; that's why he felt attracted to you--but the evil in him
was too strong; you had to draw it out of him into yourself to free
him. Then, being evil, you had to suffer the worst pains of hell for his
sake, to bring atonement. Your work's ended. You can go in peace!

LADY. Where?

CONFESSOR. Up there. Where the sun's always shining.

LADY (rising). Is there a home for me there, too?

CONFESSOR. There's a home for everyone! I'll show you the way. (He goes
with her into the background. The STRANGER makes a movement.) You're
impatient? You mustn't be! (He goes out. The STRANGER remains sitting
alone. The WORSHIPPERS OF VENUS get up, go towards him and form a circle
round him.)

STRANGER. What do you want with me?

WORSHIPPERS. Hail! Father.

STRANGER (much upset). Why call me that?

FIRST VOICE. Because we're your children. Your dear ones!

STRANGER (tries to escape, but is surrounded and cannot). Let me go. Let
me go!

SECOND VOICE (that of a pale youth). Don't you recognise me, Father?

TEMPTER (appearing in the background at the left-hand fork of the path).
Ha!

STRANGER (to the Second Voice). Who are you? I seem to know your face.

SECOND VOICE. I'm Erik--your son!

STRANGER. Erik! You here?

SECOND VOICE. Yes. I'm here.

STRANGER. God have mercy! And you, my boy, forgive me!

SECOND VOICE. Never! You showed us the way to the sulphur springs! Is it
far to the lake?

(The STRANGER falls to the ground.)

TEMPTER. Ha! Jubilate, temptatores!

VENUS WORSHIPPERS. Sulphur! Sulphur! Sulphur! Mercury!

TEMPTER (coming forward and touching the STRANGER with his foot). The
worm! You can make him believe whatever you like. That comes from his
unbelievable pride. Does he think he's the mainspring of the universe,
the originator of all evil? This foolish man believes he taught youth to
go in search of Venus; as if youth hadn't done that long before he was
born! His pride's insupportable, and he's been rash enough to try to
botch my work for me. Give him another greeting, lying Erik! (The SECOND
VOICE--that is the youth--bends over the STRANGER and whispers in his
ear.) There were seven deadly sins; but now there are eight. The eighth
I discovered! It's called despair. For to despair of what is good,
and not to hope for forgiveness, is to call... (He hesitates before
pronouncing the word God, as if it burnt his lips.) God wicked. That is
calumny, denial, blasphemy.... Look how he winces!

STRANGER (rising quickly, and looking the TEMPTER to the eyes). Who are
you?

TEMPTER. Your brother. Don't we resemble one another? Some of your
features seem to remind me of my portrait.

STRANGER. Where have I seen it?

TEMPTER. Almost everywhere! I'm often to be found in churches, though
not amongst the saints.

STRANGER. I can't remember....

TEMPTER. Is it so long since you've been to church? I'm usually
represented with St. George. (The STRANGER totters and would like to
fly, but cannot.) Michael and I are sometimes to be seen in a group, in
which, to be sure, I don't appear in the most favourable light; but that
can be altered. All can be altered; and one day the last shall be first.
It's just the same in your case. For the moment, things are going badly
with you, but that can be altered too... if you've enough intelligence
to change your company. You've had too much to do with skirts, my son.
Skirts raise dust, and dust lies on eyes and breast.... Come and sit
down. We'll have a chat.... (He takes the STRANGER jocularly by the ear
and leads him round the table.) Sit down and tremble, young man! (They
both sit down.) Well? What shall we do? Call for wine--and a woman? No!
That's too old a trick, as old as Doctor Faust! Bon! We modern are in
search of mental dissipation.... So you're on your way to those holy men
up there, who think that they who sleep can't sin; to the cowardly ones,
who've given up the battle of life, because they were defeated once or
twice; to those that bind souls rather than free them.... And talking of
that! Has any saintly man ever freed you from the burden of sin? No!
Do you know why sin has been oppressing you for so long? Through
renunciation and abstinence, you've grown so weak that anyone can seize
your soul and take possession of it. Why, they can even do it from a
distance! You've so destroyed your personality that you see with strange
eyes, hear with strange ears and think strange thoughts. In a word
you've murdered your own soul. Just now, didn't you speak well of the
enemies of mankind; of Woman, who made a hell of paradise? You needn't
answer me; I can read your answer in your eyes and hear it on your lips.
You talk of pure love for a woman! That's lust, young man, lust after a
woman, which we have to pay for so dearly. You say you don't desire her.
Then why do you want to be near her? You'd like to have a friend? Take a
male friend, many of them! You've let them convince you you're no woman
hater. But the woman gave you the right answer; every healthy man's a
woman hater, but can't live without linking himself to his enemy, and
so must fight her! All perverse and unmanly men are admirers of women!
How's it with you now? So you saw those invalids and thought yourself
responsible for their misery? They're tough fellows, you can believe
me; they'll be able to leave here in a few days and go back to their
occupations. Oh yes, lying Erik's a wag! But things have gone so far
with you, that you can't distinguish between your own and other people's
children. Wouldn't it be a great thing to escape from all this? What do
you say? Oh, I could free you... but I'm no saint. Now we'll call old
Maia. (He whistles between his fingers: MAIA appears.) Ah, there you
are! Well, what are you doing here? Have you any business with this
fellow?

MAIA. No. He's good and always was; but he'd a terrible wife.

TEMPTER (to the STRANGER). Listen! You've not heard that yet, have you?
Rather the opposite. She was the good angel, whom you ruined... we've
all been told that! Now, old Maia, what kind of story is it he prattles
of? He says he was plagued with remorse for seven years because he owed
you money.

MAIA. He owed me a small sum once; but I got it back from him--and with
good interest--much better than the savings bank would have given me. It
was very good of him--very kind.

STRANGER (starting up). What's that you said? Is it possible I've
forgotten?

TEMPTER. Have you the receipt, Maia? If so, give it me.

MAIA. The gentleman must have the receipt; but I've got the savings bank
book here. He paid the money into it in my name. (She produces a savings
bank book, and hands it to the STRANGER, who looks at it.)

STRANGER. Yes, that's quite right. Now I remember. Then why this
seven-year torment, shame and disgrace? Those reproaches during
sleepless nights? Why? Why? Why?

TEMPTER. Old Maia, you can go now. But first say something nice about
this self-tormentor. Can't you remember any human quality in this wild
beast, whom human beings have baited for years?

STRANGER (to MAIA). Quiet, don't answer him! (He stops his ears with his
fingers.)

TEMPTER. Well, Maia?

MAIA. I know well enough what they say about him, but that refers to
what he writes--and I've not read it for I can't read. Still, no one
need read it, if they don't want to. Anyhow the gentleman's been very
kind. Now he's stopping his ears. I don't know how to flatter; but I can
say this in a whisper.... (She whispers some thing to the TEMPTER.)

TEMPTER. Yes. All human beings who are easily moved are baited like wild
beasts! It's the rule. Good bye, old Maia!

MAIA. Good-bye, kind gentlemen. (She goes out.)

STRANGER. Why did I suffer innocently for seven years?

TEMPTER (pointing upwards with one finger). Ask up there!

STRANGER. Where I never get an answer!

TEMPTER. Well, that may be. (Pause.) Do you think _I_ look good?

STRANGER. I can't say I do.

TEMPTER. You look extremely wicked, too! Do you know why we look like
that?

STRANGER. No.

TEMPTER. The hate and malice of our fellow human beings have fastened
themselves on us. Up there, you know, there are real saints, who've
never done anything wicked themselves, but who suffer for others, for
relations, who've committed unexpiated sins. Those angels, who've taken
the depravity of others on themselves, really resemble bandits. What do
you say to that?

STRANGER. I don't know who you are; but you're the first to answer
questions that might reconcile me to life. You are....

TEMPTER. Well, say it!

STRANGER. The deliverer!

TEMPTER. And therefore....?

STRANGER. Therefore you've been given a vulture.... But listen, have you
ever thought that there's as good a reason for this as for everything
else? Granted the earth's a prison, on which dangerous prisoners are
confined--is it a good thing to set them free? Is it right?

TEMPTER. What a question! I've never really thought about it. Hm!

STRANGER. And have you ever thought of this: we may be born in guilt?

TEMPTER. That's nothing to do with me: I concern myself with the
present.

STRANGER. Good! Don't you think we're sometimes punished wrongly, so
that we fail to see the logical connection, though it exists?

TEMPTER. Logic's not missing; but all life's a tissue of offences,
mistakes, errors, that are comparatively blameless owing to human
weakness, but that are punished by the most consistent revenge.
Everything's revenged, even our injudicious actions. Who forgives? A
magnanimous man-sometimes; heavenly justice, never! (A PILGRIM appears
in the background.) See! A penitent! I'd like to know what wrong he's
done. We'll ask him. Welcome to our quiet meadows, peaceful wanderer!
Take your place at the simple table of the ascetic, at which there are
no more temptations.

PILGRIM. Thank you, fellow traveller in the vale of woe.

TEMPTER. What kind of woe is yours?

PILGRIM. None in particular; on the contrary, the hour of liberation's
struck, and I'm going up there to receive absolution.

STRANGER. Listen, haven't we two met before?

PILGRIM. I think so, certainly.

STRANGER. Caesar! You're Caesar!

PILGRIM. I used to be; but I am no longer.

TEMPTER. Ha ha! Imperial acquaintance. Really! But tell us, tell us!

PILGRIM. You shall hear. Now I've a right to speak, for my penance is at
an end. When we met at a certain doctor's house, I was shut up there
as a madman and supposed to be suffering from the illusion that I was
Caesar. Now the Stranger shall hear the truth of the matter: I never
believed it, but I was forced by scruples of conscience to put a good
face on it.... A friend of mine, a bad friend, had written proof that I
was the victim of a misunderstanding; but he didn't speak when he should
have, and I took his silence as a request not to speak either-and to
suffer. Why did I? Well, in my youth I was once in great need. I was
received as a guest in a house on an island far out to sea by a man who,
in spite of unusual gifts, had been passed over for promotion--owing to
his senseless pride. This man, by solitary brooding on his lot, had come
to hold quite extraordinary views about himself. I noticed it, but I
said nothing. One day this man's wife told me that he was sometimes
mentally unbalanced; and then thought he was Julius Caesar. For many
years I kept this secret conscientiously, for I'm not ungrateful by
nature. But life's tricky. It happened a few years later that this
Caesar laid rough hands on my most intimate fate. In anger at this I
betrayed the secret of his Caesar mania and made my erstwhile benefactor
such a laughing stock, that his existence became unbearable to him. And
now listen how Nemesis overtakes one! A year later I wrote a book-I am,
you must know, an author who's not made his name.... And in this book I
described incidents of family life: how I played with my daughter--she
was called Julia, as Caesar's daughter was--and with my wife, whom we
called Caesar's wife because no one spoke evil of her.... Well, this
recreation, in which my mother-in-law joined too, cost me dear. When I
was looking through the proofs of my book, I saw the danger and said to
myself: you'll trip yourself up. I wanted to cut it out but, if you'll
believe it, the pen refused, and an inner voice said to me: let it
stand! It did stand! And I fell.

STRANGER. Why didn't you publish the letter from your friend that would
have explained everything?

PILGRIM. When the disaster had happened I felt at once that it was the
finger of God, and that I must suffer for my ingratitude.

STRANGER. And you did suffer?

PILGRIM. Not at all! I smiled to myself and wouldn't let myself be put
out. And because I accepted my punishment with calmness and humility God
lightened my burden; and I didn't feel myself ridiculous.

TEMPTER. That's a strange story; but such things happen. Shall we move
on now? We'll go for an excursion, now we've weathered the storms. Pull
yourself up by the roots, and then we'll climb the mountain.

STRANGER. The Confessor told me to wait for him.

TEMPTER. He'll find you, anyhow! And up here in the village the court's
sitting to-day. A particularly interesting case is to be tried; and I
dare say I'll be called as a witness. Come!

STRANGER. Well, whether I sit here, or up there, is all the same to me.

PILGRIM (to the STRANGER). Who's that?

STRANGER. I don't know. He looks like an anarchist.

PILGRIM. Interesting, anyhow!

STRANGER. He's a sceptical gentleman, who's seen life.

TEMPTER. Come, children; I'll tell you stories on the way. Come. Come!

(They go out towards the background.)

Curtain.




ACT III

SCENE I

TERRACE ON THE MOUNTAIN

[A Terrace on the mountain on which the Monastery stands. On the right
a rocky cliff and a similar one on the left. In the far background a
bird's-eye view of a river landscape with towns, villages, ploughed
fields and woods; in the very far distance the sea can be seen. Down
stage an apple tree laden with fruit. Under it a long table with a chair
at the end and benches at the sides. Down stage, right, a corner of
the village town hall. A cloud seems to be hanging immediately over the
village.]

[The MAGISTRATE sits at the end of the table in the capacity of judge;
the assessors on the benches. The ACCUSED MAN is standing on the right
by the MAGISTRATE; the witnesses on the left, amongst them the TEMPTER.
Members of the public, with the PILGRIM and the STRANGER, are standing
here and there not far from the judge's seat.]

MAGISTRATE. Is the accused present?

ACCUSED MAN. Yes. Present.

MAGISTRATE. This is a very sad story, that's brought trouble and shame
on our small community. Florian Reicher, twenty-three years old, is
accused of shooting at Fritz Schlipitska's affianced wife, with the
clear intention of killing her. It's a case of premeditated murder, and
the provisions of the law are perfectly clear. Has the accused anything
to say in his defence, or can he plead mitigating circumstances?

ACCUSED MAN. No.

TEMPTER. Ho, there!

MAGISTRATE. Who are you?

TEMPTER. Counsel for the accused.

MAGISTRATE. The accused man certainly has a right to the services of
counsel, but in the present case I think the facts are so clear that the
people have reached a certain conclusion; and the murderer will hardly
be able to regain their sympathy. Isn't that so?

PEOPLE. He's condemned already!

TEMPTER. Who by?

PEOPLE. The Law and his own deed.

TEMPTER. Listen to me! As counsel for the accused I represent him and
take the accusation on myself. I ask permission to address the court.

MAGISTRATE. I can't refuse it.

PEOPLE. Florian's been condemned already.

TEMPTER. The case must first be heard. (Pause.) I'd reached my
eighteenth year--it's Florian speaking--and my thoughts, as I grew up
under my mother's watchful eye, were pure; and my heart without deceit,
for I'd never seen or heard anything wicked. Then I--Florian, that
is--met a young girl who seemed to me the most beautiful creature I'd
ever set eyes on in this wicked world, for she was goodness itself. I
offered her my hand, my heart, and my future. She accepted everything
and swore that she'd be true. I was to serve five years for my
Rachel--and I did serve, collecting one straw after another for the
little nest we were going to build. My whole life was centred on the
love of this woman! As I was true to her myself, I never mistrusted her.
By the fifth year I'd built the hut and collected our household goods...
when I discovered she'd been playing with me and had deceived me with at
least three men....

MAGISTRATE. Have you witnesses?

BAILIFF. Three valid ones; I'm one of them.

MAGISTRATE. The bailiff alone will be sufficient.

TEMPTER. Then I shot her; not out of revenge, but in order to free
myself from the unhealthy thoughts her faithlessness had forced on me;
for when I tried to tear her picture out of my heart, images of her
lovers always rose and crept into my blood, so that at last I seemed to
be living in unlawful relationship with three men--with a woman as the
link between us!

MAGISTRATE. Well, that was jealousy!

ACCUSED MAN. Yes, that was jealousy.

TEMPTER. Yes, jealousy, that feeling for cleanliness, that seeks to
preserve thoughts from pollution by strangers. If I'd been content to do
nothing, if I'd not been jealous, I'd have got into vicious company, and
I didn't want to do that. That's why she had to die so that my thoughts
might be cleansed of deadly sin, which alone is to be condemned. I've
finished.

PEOPLE. The dead woman's guilty! Her blood's on her own head.

MAGISTRATE. She's guilty, for she was the cause of the crime.

(The FATHER of the dead woman steps forward.)

FATHER. Your Worship, judge of my dead child; and you, countrymen, let
me speak!

MAGISTRATE. The dead girl's father may speak.

FATHER. You're accusing a dead girl; and I shall answer. Maria, my
child, has undoubtedly been guilty of a crime and is to blame for the
misdeeds of this man. There's no doubt of it!

PEOPLE. No doubt! It's she who's guilty!

FATHER. Permit her father to add a word of explanation, if not of
defence. (Pause.) When she was fifteen, Maria fell into the hands of a
man who seemed to have made it his business to entrap young girls, much
as a bird-catcher traps small birds. He was no seducer, in the ordinary
sense, for he contented himself with binding her senses and entangling
her feelings only to thrust her away and watch how she suffered with
torn wings and a broken heart--tortured by the agony of love, which is
worse than any other agony. For three years Maria was cared for in an
institution for the mentally deranged. And when she came out again, she
was divided, broken into several pieces--it might be said that she was
several persons. She was an angel and feared God with one side of her
spirit; but with another she was a devil, and reviled all that was
holy. I've seen her go straight from dancing and frenzy to her beloved
Florian, and have heard her, in his presence, speak so differently and
so alter her expression, that I could have sworn she was another being.
But to me she seemed equally sincere in both her shapes. Is she to
blame, or her seducer?

PEOPLE. She's not to blame! Where is her seducer?

FATHER. There!

TEMPTER. Yes. It was I.

PEOPLE. Stone him!

MAGISTRATE. The law must run its course. He must be heard.

TEMPTER. Bon! Then listen, Argives! It was like this. Your humble
servant, born of poor but fairly honourable parents, was from the
beginning one of those strange birds who, in their youth, go in search
of their Creator--but without ever finding him, naturally! It's more
usual for old cuckoos to look for him in their dotage--and for good
reasons! The urge for this youthful quest was accompanied by a purity
of heart and a modesty that even caused his nurses to smile--yes, we can
laugh now when we hear that this boy would only change his underclothing
in the dark! But even if we're corrupted by the crudities of life,
we're still bound to find something beautiful in it; and if we're older
something touching! And so we can afford to-day to laugh at his childish
innocence. Scornful laughter, listeners, please.

MAGISTRATE (seriously). He mistakes his listeners.

TEMPTER. Then I ought to be ashamed of myself! (Pause.) He became a
youth--your humble servant--and fell into a series of traps that
were laid for his innocence. I'm an old sinner, but I blush at this
moment.... (He takes of his hat.) Yes, look at me now--when I think of
the insight this young man got into the world of Potiphar's wives that
surrounded him! There wasn't a single woman.... Really, I'm ashamed in
the name of mankind and the female sex--excuse me, please.... There were
moments when I didn't believe my eyes, but thought a devil had blinded
my sight. The holiest bands.... (He pinches his tongue.) No, quiet!
Mankind will feel itself calumniated! Enough, until my twenty-fifth
year I fought the good fight; and I fell because.... Well, I was called
Joseph, and I _was_ Joseph! I grew jealous of my virtue, and felt
injured by the glances of a lewd woman.... And at last, cunningly
seduced, I fell. Then I became a slave of my passions; often and often I
sat by Omphalos and span, until I sank into the deepest degradation and
suffered, suffered, suffered! But in reality it was only my body that
was degraded; my soul lived her own life--her own pure life, I can
say--on her own account. And I raved innocently for pure young virgins
who, it seems, felt the bond that drew us together. Because, without
boasting, I can say they were attracted to me. I didn't want to overstep
the mark, but they did! And when I fled the danger, their hearts were
broken, so they said. In a word, I've never seduced an innocent girl.
I swear it! Am I therefore to blame for the emotional sorrows of this
young woman, who went out of her mind? On the contrary, mayn't I count
it a virtue that I shrank in horror from the step that brought about
her fall? Who'll cast the first stone at me? No one! Then I mistake my
listeners. Indeed, I thought I might be an object of scorn, if I were to
plead here for my masculine innocence! Now, however, I feel young again;
and there's something for which I'd like to ask mankind's forgiveness.
If it weren't that I happened to see a cynical smile on the lips of the
woman who seduced me when I was young. Come forward, woman, and look
upon your work of destruction. Observe, how the seed has grown!

WOMAN (coming forward with dignity and modesty). It was I! Let me
be heard, and let me tell the simple story of my seduction. (Pause.)
Luckily my seducer is here, too....

MAGISTRATE. Friends! I must break off the proceedings; otherwise we'll
get back to Eve in Paradise.

TEMPTER. Who was Adam's seducer! That's just where we want to get back
to. Eve! Come forward, Eve. Eve! (He waves his cloak in the air. The
trunk of the tree becomes transparent and EVE appears, wrapped in her
hair and with a girdle about her loins.) Now, Mother Eve, it was you who
seduced our father. You are the accused: what have you to say in your
defence?

EVE (simply and with dignity). The serpent tempted me!

TEMPTER. Well answered! Eve has proved her innocence. The serpent! Let
the serpent come forward. (EVE disappears.) The serpent! (The serpent
appears in the tree trunk.) Here you can see the seducer of us all. Now,
serpent, who was it that beguiled you?

ALL (terrified). Silence! Blasphemer!

TEMPTER. Answer, serpent! (Lightning and a clap of thunder; all flee,
except the TEMPTER, who has fallen to the ground, and the PILGRIM, the
STRANGER and the LADY. The TEMPTER begins to recover; he then gets up
and sits down in an attitude that recalls the classical statue 'The
Polisher,' or 'The Slave.') Causa finalis, or the first cause--you can't
discover that! For if the serpent's to blame, then we're comparatively
innocent--but mankind mustn't be told that! The Accused, however, seems
to have got out of this business! And the Court of justice has dissolved
like smoke! Judge not. Judge not, O Judges!

LADY (to the STRANGER). Come with me.

STRANGER. But I'd like to listen to this man.

LADY. Why? He's like a small child, putting all those questions that
can't be answered. You know how little children ask about everything.
'Papa, why does the sun rise in the east?' You know the answer?

STRANGER. Hm!

LADY. Or: 'Mama, who made God?' You think that profound? Well, come with
me.

STRANGER (fighting his admiration for the TEMPTER). But that about Eve
was new....

LADY. Not at all. I learnt it in my Bible history, when I was eight. And
that we inherit the debts of our fathers is part of the law of the land.
Come, my son.

TEMPTER (rising, shaking his limbs and climbing up the rocky wall to the
right with a limp). Come, I'll show you the world you think you know,
but don't.

LADY (climbing up the rocky wall to the left). Come with me, my son, and
I'll show you God's beautiful world, as I've come to see it, since the
tears of sorrow washed the dust from my eyes. Come with me!

(The STRANGER stands irresolute between them.)

TEMPTER (to the LADY). And how have you seen the world through your
tears? Like meadow banks reflected in troubled water! A chaos of curved
lines in which the trees seemed to be standing on their heads. (To
the STRANGER.) No, my son, with my field-glasses, dried in the fire of
hate--with my telescope I can see everything as it is. Clear and sharp,
precisely as it is.

LADY. What do you know of things, my son? You can never see the thing
itself, only its picture; and the picture is illusion and not the thing.
So you argue about pictures and illusions.

TEMPTER. Listen to her! A little philosopher in skirts. By Jupiter
Chronos, such a disputation in this giant amphitheatre of the mountains
demands a proper audience. Hullo!

LADY. I have mine here: my friend, my husband, my child! If he'll only
listen to me, good; all will be well with me, and him. Come to me,
my friend, for this is the way. This is the mountain Gerizim, where
blessings are given. And that is Ebal, where they curse.

TEMPTER. Yes, this is Ebal, where they curse. 'Cursed be the earth,
woman, for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou bring forth children; and thy
desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.' And then
to the man this: 'Cursed is the ground for thy sake, thorns and thistle
shall it bring forth to thee, and in the sweat of thy brow shalt thou
labour!' So spoke the Lord, not I!

LADY. 'And God blessed the first pair; and He blessed the seventh day,
on which He had completed His work--and the work was good.' But you, and
we, have made it something evil, and that is why.... But he who obeys
the commandments of the Lord dwells on Gerizim, where blessings are
given. Thus saith the Lord. 'Blessed shalt thou be in the city, and
blessed shalt thou be in the field. Blessed shall be thy basket and thy
store. Blessed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and blessed when thou
goest out. And the Lord shall give rain unto thy land in his season
to increase thy harvest, and thy children shall flourish. And the Lord
shall make thee plenteous in goods, to lend to the peoples, and never to
borrow. And the Lord will bless all the work of thy hand, if thou shalt
keep the commandments of the Lord thy God!' (Pause.) So come, my friend,
and lay your hand in mine. (She falls on her knees with clasped hands.)
I beg you, by the love that once united us, by the memory of the
child that drew us together; by the strength of a mother's love--a
mother's--for so have I loved you, erring child, whom I've sought in the
dark places of the wood and whom at last I've found, hungry and withered
for want of love! Come back to me, prodigal one; and bury your tired
head on my heart, where you rested before ever you saw the light of the
sun. (A change comes over her during this speech; her clothing falls
from her and she is seen to have changed into a white-robed woman with
her hair let down and with a full maternal bosom.)

STRANGER. Mother!

LADY. Yes, my child, your mother! In life I could never caress you--the
will of higher powers denied it me. Why that was I don't dare to ask.

STRANGER. But my mother's dead?

LADY. She was; but the dead aren't dead, and maternal love can conquer
death. Didn't you know that? Come, my child, I'll repay where I have
been to blame. I'll rock you to sleep on my knees. I'll wash you clean
from the... (She omits the word she cannot bring herself to utter) of
hate and sin. I'll comb your hair, matted with the sweat of fear; and
air a pure white sheet for you at the fire of a home--a home you've
never had, you who've known no peace, you homeless one, son of Hagar,
the serving woman, born of a slave, against whom every man's hand was
raised. The ploughmen ploughed your back and seared deep furrows there.
Come, I'll heal your wounds, and suffer your sorrows. Come!

STRANGER (who has been weeping so violently that his whole body has been
trembling, now goes to the cliff on the left where the MOTHER stands
with open arms.) I'm coming!

TEMPTER. I can do nothing now. But one day we shall meet again! (He
disappears behind the cliff.)

Curtain.


SCENE II

ROCKY LANDSCAPE ON THE MOUNTAIN

[Higher up the mountain; among the clouds a rocky landscape with a bog
round it. The MOTHER on a rock, climbing until she disappears into the
cloud. The STRANGER stops, bewildered.]

STRANGER. Oh, Mother, Mother! Why are you leaving me? At the very moment
when my loveliest dream was on the point of fulfilment!

TEMPTER (coming forward). What have you been dreaming? Tell me!

STRANGER. My dearest hope, most secret desire and last prayer!
Reconciliation with mankind, through a woman.

TEMPTER. Through a woman who taught you to hate.

STRANGER. Yes, because she bound me to earth--like the round shot a
slave drags on his foot, so that he can't escape.

TEMPTER. You talk of woman. Always woman.

STRANGER. Yes. Woman. The beginning and the end--for us men anyhow. In
relationship to one another they are nothing.

TEMPTER. So that's it; nothing in themselves; but everything for us,
through us! Our honour and our shame; our greatest joy, our deepest
pain; our redemption and our fall; our wages and our punishment; our
strength and our weakness.

STRANGER. Our shame! You've said so. Explain this riddle to me, you
who're wise. Whenever I appeared in public arm in arm with a woman,
my wife, who was beautiful and whom I adored, I felt ashamed of my own
weakness. Explain that riddle to me.

TEMPTER. You felt ashamed? I don't know why.

STRANGER. Can't you answer? You, of all men?

TEMPTER. No, I can't. But I too always suffered when I was with my wife
in company, because I felt she was being soiled by men's glances, and I
through her.

STRANGER. And when she did the shameful deed, you were dishonoured. Why?

TEMPTER. The Eve of the Greeks was called Pandora, and Zeus created her
out of wickedness, in order to torture men and master them. As a wedding
gift she received a box, containing all the unhappiness of the world.
Perhaps the riddle of this sphinx can more easily be guessed, if it's
seen from. Olympus, rather than from the pleasure garden of Paradise.
Its full meaning will never be known to us. Though I'm as able as
you. (Pause.) And, by the way, I can still enjoy the greatest pleasure
creation ever offered! Go you and do likewise!

STRANGER. You mean Satan's greatest illusion! For the woman who seems
most beautiful to me, can seem horrible to others! Even for me, when
she's angry, she can be uglier than any other woman. Then what is
beauty?

TEMPTER. A semblance, a reflection of your own goodness! (He puts his
hand over his mouth.) Curses on it! I let it out that time. And now the
devil's loose....

STRANGER. Devil? Yes. But if she's a devil, how can a devil make me
desire virtue and goodness? For that's what happened to me when I first
saw her beauty; I was seized with a longing to be like her, and so to
be worthy of her. To begin with I tried to be by taking exercise, having
baths, using cosmetics and wearing good clothes; but I only made myself
ridiculous. Then I began from within; I accustomed myself to thinking
good thoughts, speaking well of people and acting nobly! And one day,
when my outward form had moulded itself on the soul within, I became her
likeness, as she said. And it was she who first uttered those wonderful
words: I love you! How can a devil ennoble us; how can a spirit of hell
fill us with goodness; how...? No, she was an angel! A fallen angel,
of course, and her love a broken ray of that great light--that great
eternal light--that warms and loves.... That loves....

TEMPTER. What, old friend, must we stand here like two youths and spell
out the riddles of love?

CONFESSOR (coming in). What's this chatterer saying? He's talked away
his whole life; and never done anything.

TEMPTER. I wanted to be a priest, but had no vocation.

CONFESSOR. Whilst you're waiting for it, help me to find a drunkard
who's drowned himself in the bog. It must be near here, because I've
been following his tracks till now.

TEMPTER. Then it's the man lying beneath that brushwood there.

CONFESSOR (picking up some twigs, and disclosing a fully clothed corpse,
with a white, young face.) Yes, it is! (He grows pensive as he looks at
the dead man.)

TEMPTER. Who was he?

CONFESSOR. It's extraordinary!

TEMPTER. He must have been a good-looking man. And quite young.

CONFESSOR. Oh no. He was fifty-four. And when I saw him a week ago, he
looked like sixty-four. His eyes were as yellow as the slime of a garden
snail and bloodshot from drunkenness; but also because he'd shed tears
of blood over his vices and misery. His face was brown and swollen like
a piece of liver on a butcher's table, and he hid himself from men's
eyes out of shame--up to the end he seems to have been ashamed of the
broken mirror of his soul, for he covered his face with brushwood. I
saw him fighting his vices; I saw him praying to God on his knees for
deliverance, after he'd been dismissed from his post as a teacher....
But... Well, now he's been delivered. And look, now the evil's been
taken from him, the good and beautiful that was in him has again become
apparent; that's what he looked like when he was nineteen! (Pause.) This
is sin--imposed as a punishment. Why? That we don't know. 'He who
hateth the righteous, shall himself be guilty!' So it is written, as an
indication. I knew him when he was young! And now I remember... he
was always very angry with those who never drank. He criticised and
condemned, and always set his cult of the grape on the altar of earthly
joys! Now he's been set free. Free from sin, from shame, from ugliness.
Yes, in death he looks beautiful. Death is the deliverer! (To the
STRANGER.) Do you hear that, Deliverer, you who couldn't even free a
drunkard from his evil passions!

TEMPTER. Crime as punishment? That's not so bad. Most penetrating!

CONFESSOR. So I think. You'll have new matter for argument.

TEMPTER. Now I'll leave you gentlemen for a while. But soon we'll meet
again. (He goes out.)

CONFESSOR. I saw you just now with a woman! So there are still
temptations?

STRANGER. Not the kind you mean.

CONFESSOR. Then what kind?

STRANGER. I could still imagine a reconciliation between mankind and
woman--through woman herself! And indeed, through that woman who was my
wife and has now become what I once held her to be having been purified
and lifted up by sorrow and need. But...

CONFESSOR. But what?

STRANGER. Experience teaches; the nearer, the further off: the further
from one another, the nearer one can be.

CONFESSOR. I've always known that--it was known by Dante, who all his
life possessed the soul of Beatrice; and Beethoven, who was united from
afar with Therese von Brunswick, knew it, though she was the wife of
another!

STRANGER. And yet! Happiness is only to be found in her company.

CONFESSOR. Then stay with her.

STRANGER. You're forgetting one thing: we're divorced.

CONFESSOR. Good! Then you can begin a new marriage. And it'll promise
all the more, because both of you are new people.

STRANGER. Do you think anyone would marry us?

CONFESSOR. I, for instance? That's asking too much.

STRANGER. Yes. I'd forgotten! But I daresay someone could be found. It's
another thing to get a home together....

CONFESSOR. You're sometimes lucky, even if you won't see it. There's
a small house down there by the river; it's quite new and the owner's
never even seen it. He was an Englishman who wanted to marry; but at
the last moment _she_ broke off the engagement. It was built by his
secretary, and neither of the engaged couple ever set eyes on it. It's
quite intact, you see!

STRANGER. IS it to let?

CONFESSOR. Yes.

STRANGER. Then I'll risk it. And I'll try to begin life all over again.

CONFESSOR. Then you'll go down?

STRANGER. Out of the clouds. Below the sun's shining, and up here the
air's a little thin.

CONFESSOR. Good! Then we must part--for a time.

STRANGER. Where are you going?

CONFESSOR. Up.

STRANGER. And I down; to the earth, the mother with the soft bosom and
warm lap....

CONFESSOR. Until you long once more for what's hard as stone, as cold
and as white... Farewell! Greetings to those below!

(Each of them goes of in the direction he has chosen.)

Curtain.


SCENE III

A SMALL HOUSE ON THE MOUNTAIN

[A pleasant, panelled dining-room, with a tiled stove of majolica. On
the dining-table, which is in the middle of the room, stand vases filled
with flowers; also two candelabra with many lighted candles. A large
carved sideboard on the left. On the right, two windows. At the
back, two doors; that on the left is open and gives a view of the
drawing-room, belonging to the lady of the house, which is furnished in
light green and mahogany, and has a standard lamp of brass with a large,
lemon-coloured lampshade, which is lit. The door on the right is closed.
On the left behind the sideboard the entrance from the hall.]

[From the left the STRANGER enters, dressed as a bridegroom; and the
LADY, dressed as a bride; both radiant with youth and beauty.]

STRANGER. Welcome to my house, belovèd; to your home and mine, my bride;
to your dwelling-place, my wife!

LADY. I'm grateful, dear friend! It's like a fairy tale!

STRANGER. Yes, it is. A whole book of fairy tales, my dear, written by
me.

(They sit down on either side of the table.)

LADY. Is this real? It seems too lovely to me.

STRANGER. I've never seen you look so young, so beautiful.

LADY. It's your own eyes....

STRANGER. Yes, my own eyes that have learnt to see. And your goodness
taught them....

LADY. Which itself was taught by sorrow.

STRANGER. Ingeborg!

LADY. It's the first time you've called me by that name.

STRANGER. The first? I've never met Ingeborg; I've never known you,
as you are, sitting here in our home! Home! An enchanting word. An
enchanting thing I've never yet possessed. A home and a wife! You are
my first, my only one; for what once happened exists no longer--no more
than the hour that's past!

LADY. Orpheus! Your song has made these dead stones live. Make life sing
in me!

STRANGER. Eurydice, whom I rescued from the underworld! I'll love you to
life again; revivify you with my imagination. Now happiness will come to
us, for we know the dangers to avoid.

LADY. The dangers, yes! It's lovely in this house. It seems as if these
rooms were full of invisible guests, who've come to welcome us. Kind
spirits, who'll bless us and our home.

STRANGER. The candle flames are still, as if in prayer. The flowers are
pensive.... And yet!

LADY. Hush! The summer night's outside, warm and dark. And stars hang
in the sky; large and tearful in the fir trees, like Christmas candles.
This is happiness. Hold it fast!

STRANGER (still thinking). And yet!

LADY. Hush!

STRANGER (getting up). A poem's coming: I can hear it. It's for you.

LADY. Don't tell it me. I can see it--in your eyes.

STRANGER. For I read it in yours! Well, I couldn't repeat it, because it
has no words. Only scent, and colour. If I were to, I should destroy it.
What's unborn is always most beautiful. What's unwon, most dear!

LADY. Quiet. Or, our guests will leave us.

(They do not speak.)

STRANGER. This _is_ happiness--but I can't grasp it.

LADY. See it and breath it; for it can't be grasped.

(They do not speak.)

STRANGER. You're looking at your little room.

LADY. It's as bright green as a summer meadow. There's someone in there.
Several people!

STRANGER. Only my thoughts.

LADY. Your good, your beautiful thoughts....

STRANGER. Given me by you.

LADY. Had I anything to give you?

STRANGER. You? Everything! But up to now my hands have not been free to
take it. Not clean enough to stroke your little heart....

LADY. Beloved! The time for reconciliation's coming.

STRANGER. With mankind, and woman--through a woman? Yes, that time has
come; and blessed may you be amongst women.

(The candles and lamps go out; it grows dark in the dining-room; but a
weak ray of light can be seen, coming from the brass standard lamp in
the LADY's room.)

LADY. Why's it grown dark? Oh!

STRANGER. Where are you, beloved? Give me your hand. I'm afraid!

LADY. Here, dearest.

STRANGER. The little hand, held out to me in the darkness, that's led me
over stones and thorns. That little, soft, dear hand! Lead me into the
light, into your bright, warm room; fresh green like hope.

LADY (leading him towards the pale-green room). Are you afraid?

STRANGER. You're a white dove, with whom the startled eagle finds
sanctuary, when heaven's thunder clouds grow black, for the dove has no
fear. She has not provoked the thunders of heaven!

(They have reached the doorway leading to the other room, when the
curtain falls.)

***

[The same room; but the table has been cleared. The LADY is sitting at
it, doing nothing. She seems bored. On the right, down stage, a window
is open. It is still. The STRANGER comes in, with a piece of paper in
his hand.]

STRANGER. Now you shall hear it.

LADY (acquiescing absent-mindedly). Finished already?

STRANGER. Already? Do you mean that seriously? I've taken seven days to
write this little poem. (Silence.) Perhaps it'll bore you to hear it?

LADY (drily). No. Certainly not. (The STRANGER sits down at the table
and looks at the LADY.) Why are you looking at me?

STRANGER. I'd like to see your thoughts.

LADY. But you've heard them.

STRANGER. That's nothing; I want to see them! (Pause.) What one says is
mostly worthless. (Pause.) May I read them? No, I see I mayn't. You want
nothing more from me. (The LADY makes a gesture as if she were going to
speak.) Your face tells me enough. Now you've sucked me dry, eaten
me hollow, killed my ego, my personality. To that I answer: how, my
beloved? Have _I_ killed your ego, when I wanted to give you the whole
of mine; when I let you skim the cream off my bowl, that I'd filled with
all the experience of along life, with incursions into the deserts and
groves of knowledge and art?

LADY. I don't deny it, but my ego wasn't my own.

STRANGER. Not yours? Then what is? Something that belongs to others?

LADY. Is yours something that belongs to others too?

STRANGER. No. What I've experienced is my own, mine and no other's. What
I've read becomes mine, because I've broken it in two like glass, melted
it down, and from this substance blown new glass in novel forms.

LADY. But I can never be yours.

STRANGER. I've become yours.

LADY. What have you got from me?

STRANGER. How can you ask me that?

LADY. All the same--I'm not sure that you think it, though I feel you
feel it--you wish me far away.

STRANGER. I must be a certain distance from you, if I'm to see you. Now
you're within the focus, and your image is unclear.

LADY. The nearer, the farther off!

STRANGER. Yes. When we part, we long for one another; and when we meet
again, we long to part.

LADY. Do you really think we love each other?

STRANGER. Yes. Not like ordinary people, but unusual ones. We resemble
two drops of water, that fear to get close together, in case they should
cease to be two and become one.

LADY. This time we knew the dangers and wanted to avoid them. But it
seems that they can't be avoided.

STRANGER. Perhaps they weren't dangers, but rude necessities; laws
inscribed in the councils of the immortals. (Silence.) Your love always
seemed to have the effect of hate. When you made me happy, you envied
the happiness you'd given me. And when you saw I was unhappy, you loved
me.

LADY. Do you want me to leave you?

STRANGER. If you do, I shall die.

LADY. And, if I stay, it's I who'll die.

STRANGER. Then let's die together and live out our love in a higher
life; our love, that doesn't seem to be of this world. Let's live it out
in another planet, where there's no nearness and no distance, where two
are one; where number, time and space are no longer what they are in
this.

LADY. I'd like to die, yet I don't want to. I think I must be dead
already.

STRANGER. The air up here's too strong.

LADY. You can't love me if you speak like that.

STRANGER. To be frank, there are moments when you don't exist for me.
But in others I feel your hatred like suffocating smoke.

LADY. And I feel my heart creeping from my breast, when you are angry
with me.

STRANGER. Then we must hate one other.

LADY. And love one another too.

STRANGER. And hate because we love. We hate each other, because we're
bound together. We hate the bond, we hate our love; we hate what is most
loveable, what is the bitterest, the best this life can offer. We've
come to an end!

LADY. Yes.

STRANGER. What a joke life is, if you take it seriously. And how
serious, if you take it as a joke! You wanted to lead me by the hand
towards the light; your easier fate was to make mine easier too. I
wanted to raise you above the bogs and quicksands; but you longed for
the lower regions, and wanted to convince me they were the upper ones. I
ask myself if it's possible that you took what was wicked from me, when
I was freed from it; and that what was good in you entered into me? If
I've made you wicked I ask your pardon, and I kiss your little hand,
that caressed and scratched me... the little hand that led me into the
darkness... and on the long journey to Damascus....

LADY. To a parting? (Silence.) Yes, a parting!

(The LADY goes on her way. The STRANGER falls on to a chair by the
table. The TEMPTER puts his head in at the window, and rests himself on
his elbows whilst he smokes a cigarette.)

TEMPTER. Ah, yes! C'est l'amour! The most mysterious of all mysteries,
the most inexplicable of all that can't be explained, the most
precarious of all that's insecure.

STRANGER. So you're here?

TEMPTER. I'm always everywhere, where it smells of quarrels. And in love
affairs there are always quarrels.

STRANGER. Always?

TEMPTER. Always! I was invited to a silver wedding yesterday.
Twenty-five years are no trifle--and for twenty-five years they'd been
quarrelling. The whole love affair had been one long shindy, with
many little ones in between! And yet they loved one another, and were
grateful for all the good that had come to them; the evil was forgotten,
wiped out--for a moment's happiness is worth ten days of blows and
pinpricks. Oh yes! Those who won't accept evil never get anything good.
The rind's very bitter, though the kernel's sweet.

STRANGER. But very small.

TEMPTER. It may be small, but it's good! (Pause.) Tell me, why did your
madonna go her way? No answer; because he doesn't know! Now we'll have
to let the hotel again. Here's a board. I'll hang it out at once. 'To
Let.' One comes, another goes! C'est la vie, quoi? Rooms for Travellers!

STRANGER. Have you ever been married?

TEMPTER. Oh yes. Of course.

STRANGER. Then why did you part?

TEMPTER. Chiefly--perhaps it's a peculiarity of mine--chiefly
because--well, you know, a man marries to get a home, to get into a
home; and a woman to get out of one. She wanted to get out, and I wanted
to get in! I was so made that I couldn't take her into company, because
I felt as if she were soiled by men's glances. And in company, my
splendid, wonderful wife turned into a little grimacing monkey I
couldn't bear the sight of. So I stayed at home; and then, she stayed
away. And when I met her again, she'd changed into someone else. She,
my pure white notepaper, was scribbled all over; her clear and lovely
features changed in imitation of the satyr-like looks of strange men.
I could see miniature photographs of bull-fighters and guardsmen in her
eyes, and hear the strange accents of strange men in her voice. On our
grand piano, on which only the harmonies of the great masters used to be
heard, she now played the cabaret songs of strange men; and on our table
there lay nothing but the favourite reading of strange men. In a
word, my whole existence was on the way to becoming an intellectual
concubinage with strange men--and that was contrary to my nature, which
has always longed for women! And--I need hardly say this--the tastes of
these strange men were always the reverse of mine. She developed a real
genius for discovering things I detested! That's what she called 'saving
her personality.' Can you understand that?

STRANGER. I can; but I won't attempt to explain it.

TEMPTER. Yet this woman maintained she loved me, and that I didn't love
her. But I loved her so much I didn't want to speak to any other human
being; because I feared to be untrue to her if I found pleasure in
the company of others, even if they were men. I'd married for feminine
society; and in order to enjoy it I'd left my friends. I'd married in
order to find company, but what I got was complete solitude! And I was
supporting house and home, in order to provide strange men with feminine
companionship. _C'est l'amour_, my friend!

STRANGER. You should never talk about your wife.

TEMPTER. No! For if you speak well of her, people will laugh; and if you
speak ill, all their sympathy will go out to her; and if, in the first
instance, you ask why they laugh, you get no answer.

STRANGER. No. You can never find out who you've married. Never get hold
of her--it seems she's no one. Tell me--what is woman?

TEMPTER. I don't know! Perhaps a larva or a chrysalis, out of whose
trance-like life a man one day will be created. She seems a child, but
isn't one; she is a sort of child, and yet not like one. Drags downward,
when the man pulls up. Drags upward, when the man pulls down.

STRANGER. She always wants to disagree with her husband; always has a
lot of sympathy for what he dislikes; is crudest beneath the greatest
superficial refinement; the wickedest amongst the best. And yet,
whenever I've been in love, I've always grown more sensitive to the
refinements of civilisation.

TEMPTER. You, I dare say. What about her?

STRANGER. Oh, whilst our love was growing _she_ was always developing
backwards. And getting cruder and more wicked.

TEMPTER. Can you explain that?

STRANGER. No. But once, when I was trying to find the solution to the
riddle by disagreeing with myself, I took it that she absorbed my evil
and I her good.

TEMPTER. Do you think woman's particularly false?

STRANGER. Yes and no. She seeks to hide her weakness but that only means
that she's ambitious and has a sense of shame. Only whores are honest,
and therefore cynical.

TEMPTER. Tell me some more about her that's good.

STRANGER. I once had a woman friend. She soon noticed that when I drank
I looked uglier than usual; so she begged me not to. I remember one
night we'd been talking in a café for many hours. When it was nearly ten
o'clock, she begged me to go home and not to drink any more. We parted,
after we'd said goodnight. A few days later I heard she'd left me only
to go to a large party, where she drank till morning. Well, I said, as
in those days I looked for all that was good in women, she meant well by
me, but had to pollute herself for business reasons.

TEMPTER. That's well thought out; and, as a view, can be defended. She
wanted to make you better than herself, higher and purer, so that she
could look up to you! But you can find an equally good explanation for
that. A wife's always angry and out of humour with her husband; and the
husband's always kind and grateful to his wife. He does all he can to
make things easy for her, and she does all she can to torture him.

STRANGER. That's not true. Of course it may sometimes appear to be so.
I once had a woman friend who shifted all the defects that she had on to
me. For instance, she was very much in love with herself, and therefore
called me the most egoistical of men. She drank, and called me a
drunkard; she rarely changed her linen and said I was dirty; she
was jealous, even of my men friends, and called me Othello. She was
masterful and called me Nero. Niggardly and called me Harpagon.

TEMPTER. Why didn't you answer her?

STRANGER. You know why very well! If I'd made clear to her what she
really was, I'd have lost her favour that moment--and it was precisely
her favour I wanted to keep.

TEMPTER. _A tout prix_! Yes, that's the source of degradation! You grow
accustomed to holding your tongue, and at last find yourself caught in a
tissue of falsehoods.

STRANGER. Wait! Don't you agree that married people so mix their
personalities that they can no longer distinguish between meum and tuum,
no longer remain separate from one another, or cannot tell their own
weaknesses from those of the other. My jealous friend, who called me
Othello, took me for herself, identified me with herself.

TEMPTER. That sounds conceivable.

STRANGER. You see! You can often explain most if you don't ask who's
to blame. For when married people begin to differ, it's like a realm
divided against itself, and that's the worst kind of disharmony.

TEMPTER. There are moments when I think a woman cannot love a man.

STRANGER. Perhaps not. To love is an active verb and woman's a passive
noun. He loves and she is loved; he asks questions and she merely
answers.

TEMPTER. Then what is woman's love?

STRANGER. The man's.

TEMPTER. Well said. And therefore when the man ceases to love her, she
severs herself from him!

STRANGER. And then?

TEMPTER. 'Sh! Someone's coming. Perhaps to take the house!

STRANGER. A woman or a man?

TEMPTER. A woman! And a man. But he's waiting outside. Now he's turned
and is going into the wood. Interesting!

STRANGER. Who is it?

TEMPTER. You can see for yourself.

STRANGER (looking out of the window). It's she! My first wife! My first
love!

TEMPTER. It seems she's left her second husband recently... and arrived
here with number three; who, if one can judge by certain movements of
his back and calves, is escaping from a stormy scene. Oh, well! But she
didn't notice his spiteful intentions. Very interesting! I'll go out and
listen.

(He disappears. The WOMAN knocks.)

STRANGER. Come in!

(The WOMAN comes in. There is a silence.)

WOMAN (excitedly). I only came here because the house was to let.

STRANGER. Oh!

WOMAN (slowly). Had I known who wanted to let it, I shouldn't have come.

STRANGER. What does it matter?

WOMAN. May I sit down a moment? I'm tired.

STRANGER. Please do. (They sit down at the table opposite one another,
in the seats occupied by the STRANGER and the LADY in the first scene.)
It's a long time since we've sat facing one another like this.

WOMAN. With flowers and lights on the table. One night...

STRANGER. When I was dressed as a bridegroom and you as a bride...

WOMAN. And the candle flames were still as in prayer and the flowers
pensive....

STRANGER. Is your husband outside?

WOMAN. No.

STRANGER. You're still seeking... what doesn't exist?

WOMAN. Doesn't it?

STRANGER. No. I always told you so, but you wouldn't believe me; you
wanted to find out for yourself. Have you found out now?

WOMAN. Not yet.

STRANGER. Why did you leave your husband? (The WOMAN doesn't reply.) Did
he beat you?

WOMAN. Yes.

STRANGER. How did he come to forget himself so far?

WOMAN. He was angry.

STRANGER. What about?

WOMAN. Nothing.

STRANGER. Why was he angry about nothing?

WOMAN (rising). No, thank you! I won't sit here and be picked to pieces.
Where's your wife?

STRANGER. She left me just now.

WOMAN. Why?

STRANGER. Why did you leave me?

WOMAN. I felt you wanted to leave me; so, not to be deserted, I went
myself.

STRANGER. I dare say that's true. But how could you read my thoughts?

WOMAN (sitting down again). What? We didn't need to speak in order to
know one another's thoughts.

STRANGER. We made a mistake when we were living together, because we
accused each other of wicked thoughts before they'd become actions; and
lived in mental reservations instead of realities. For instance, I
once noticed how you enjoyed the defiling gaze of a strange man, and I
accused you of unfaithfulness.

WOMAN. You were wrong to do so, and right. Because my thoughts were
sinful.

STRANGER. Don't you think my habit of 'anticipating you' prevented your
bad designs from being put in practice?

WOMAN. Let me think! Yes, perhaps it did. But I was annoyed to find a
spy always at my side, watching my inmost self, that was my own.

STRANGER. But it wasn't your own: it was ours!

WOMAN. Yes, but I held it to be mine, and believed you'd no right
to force your way in. When you did so I hated you; I said you were
abnormally suspicious out of self-defence. Now I can admit that your
suspicions were never wrong; that they were, in fact, the purest wisdom.

STRANGER. Oh! Do you know that, at night, when we'd said good-night as
friends and gone to sleep, I used to wake and feel your hatred poisoning
me; and think of getting out of bed so as not to be suffocated. One
night I woke and felt a pressure on the top of my head. I saw you were
awake and had put your hand close to my mouth. I thought you were making
me inhale poison from a phial; and, to make sure, I seized your hand.

WOMAN. I remember.

STRANGER. What did you do then?

WOMAN. Nothing. Only hated you.

STRANGER. Why?

WOMAN. Because you were my husband. Because I ate your bread.

STRANGER. Do you think it's always the same?

WOMAN. I don't know. I suspect it is.

STRANGER. But sometimes you've even despised me?

WOMAN. Yes, when you were ridiculous. A man in love is always
ridiculous. Do you know what a cox-comb is? That's what a lover's like.

STRANGER. But if any man who loves you is ridiculous, how can you
respond to his love?

WOMAN. We don't! We submit to it, and search for another man who doesn't
love us.

STRANGER. But if he, in turn, begins to love you, do you look for a
third?

WOMAN. Perhaps it's like that.

STRANGER. Very strange. (There is a silence.) I remember you were always
dreaming of someone you called your Toreador, which I translated by
'horse butcher.' You eventually got him, but he gave you no children,
and no bread; only beatings! A toreador's always fighting. (Silence.)
Once I let myself be tempted into trying to compete with the toreador.
I started to bicycle and fence and do other things of the kind. But you
only began to detest me for it. That means that the husband mayn't do
what the lover may. Later you had a passion for page boys. One of them
used to sit on the Brussels carpet and read you bad verses.... My good
ones were of no use to you. Did you get your page boy?

WOMAN. Yes. But his verses weren't bad, really.

STRANGER. Oh yes, they were, my dear. I know him! He stole my rhythms
and set them for the barrel organ.

WOMAN (rising and going to the door.) You should be ashamed of yourself.

(The TEMPTER conies in, holding a letter in his hand.)

TEMPTER. Here's a letter. It's for you. (The WOMAN takes it, reads it
and falls into a chair.) A farewell note! Oh, well! All beginnings
are hard--in love affairs. And those who lack the patience to surmount
initial difficulties--lose the golden fruit. Pages are always impatient.
Unknown youth, have you had enough?

STRANGER (rising and picking up his hat). My poor Anna!

WOMAN. Don't leave me.

STRANGER. I must.

WOMAN. Don't go. You were the best of them all.

TEMPTER. Do you want to begin again from the beginning? That would be
a sure way to make an end of this. For if lovers only find one another,
they lose one another! What is love? Say something witty, each one of
you, before we part.

WOMAN. I don't know what it is. The highest and the loveliest of things,
that has to sink to the lowest and the ugliest.

STRANGER. A caricature of godly love.

TEMPTER. An annual plant, that blossoms during the engagement, goes to
seed in marriage and then sinks to the earth to wither and die.

WOMAN. The loveliest flowers have no seed. The rose is the flower of
love.

STRANGER. And the lily that of innocence. That can form seeds, but only
opens her white cup to kisses.

TEMPTER. And propagates her kind with buds, out of which fresh lilies
spring, like chaste Minerva who sprang fully armed from the head of
Zeus, and not from his royal loins. Oh yes, children, I've understood
much, but never this: what the beloved of my soul has to do with.... (He
hesitates.)

STRANGER. Well, go on!

TEMPTER. What all-powerful love, that is the marriage of souls, has to
do with the propagation of the species!

STRANGER and WOMAN. Now he's come to the point!

TEMPTER. I've never been able to understand how a kiss, that's an
unborn word, a soundless speech, a quiet language of the soul, can be
exchanged, by means of a hallowed procedure, for a surgical operation,
that always ends in tears and the chattering of teeth. I've never
understood how that holy night, the first in which two souls embrace
each other in love, can end in the shedding of blood, in quarrelling,
hate, mutual contempt--and lint! (He holds his mouth shut.)

STRANGER. Suppose the story of the fall were true? In pain shalt thou
bring forth children.

TEMPTER. In that case one could understand.

WOMAN. Who is the man who says these things?

TEMPTER. Only a wanderer on the quicksands of this life. (The WOMAN
rises.) So you're ready to go. Who will go first?

STRANGER. I shall.

TEMPTER. Where?

STRANGER. Upwards. And you?

TEMPTER. I shall stay down here, in between....

Curtain.




ACT IV

SCENE I

CHAPTER HOUSE OF THE MONASTERY

[A Gothic chapter house. In the background arcades lead to the cloisters
and the courtyard of the monastery. In the middle of the courtyard there
is a well with a statue of the Virgin Mary, surrounded by long-stemmed
white roses. The walls of the chapter house are filled with built-in
choir stalls of oak. The PRIOR'S own stall is in the middle to the right
and rather higher than the rest. In the middle of the chapter house an
enormous crucifix. The sun is shining on the statue of the Virgin in
the courtyard. The STRANGER enters from the back. He is wearing a coarse
monkish cowl, with a rope round his waist and sandals on his feet. He
halts in the doorway and looks at the chapter house, then goes over to
the crucifix and stops in front of it. The last strophe of the choral
service can be heard from across the courtyard. The CONFESSOR enters
from the back; he is dressed in black and white; he has long hair and
along beard and a very small tonsure that can hardly be seen.]

CONFESSOR. Peace be with you!

STRANGER. And with you.

CONFESSOR. How do you like this white house?

STRANGER. I can only see blackness.

CONFESSOR. You still are black; but you'll grow white, quite white! Did
you sleep well last night?

STRANGER. Dreamlessly, like a tired child. But tell me: why do I find so
many locked doors?

CONFESSOR. You'll gradually learn to open them.

STRANGER. Is this a large building?

CONFESSOR. Endless! It dates from the time of Charlemagne and has
continually grown through pious benefactions. Untouched by the spiritual
upheavals and changes of different epochs, it stands on its rocky height
as a monument of Western culture. That is to say: Christian faith wedded
to the knowledge of Hellas and Rome.

STRANGER. So it's not merely a religious foundation?

CONFESSOR. No. It embraces all the arts and sciences as well. There's
a library, museum, observatory and laboratory--as you'll see later.
Agriculture and horticulture are also studied here; and a hospital for
laymen, with its own sulphur springs, is attached to the monastery.

STRANGER. One word more, before the chapter assembles. What kind of man
is the Prior?

CONFESSOR (smiling). He is the Prior! Aloof, without peer, dwelling on
the summits of human knowledge, and... well, you'll see him soon.

STRANGER. Is it true that he's so old?

CONFESSOR. He's reached an unusual age. He was born at the beginning of
the century that's now nearing its end.

STRANGER. Has he always been in the monastery?

CONFESSOR. No. He's not always been a monk, though always a priest. Once
he was a minister, but that was seventy years ago. Twice curator of the
university. Archbishop.... 'Sh! Mass is over.

STRANGER. I presume he's not the kind of unprejudiced priest who
pretends to have vices when he has none?

CONFESSOR. Not at all. But he's seen life and mankind, and he's more
human than priestly.

STRANGER. And the fathers?

CONFESSOR. Wise men, with strange histories, and none of them alike.

STRANGER. Who can never have known life as it's lived....

CONFESSOR. All have lived their lives, more than once; have suffered
shipwreck, started again, gone to pieces and risen once more. You must
wait.

STRANGER. The Prior's sure to ask me questions. I don't think I can
agree to everything.

CONFESSOR. On the contrary, you must show yourself as you are; and
defend your opinions to the last.

STRANGER. Will contradiction be permitted here?

CONFESSOR. Here? You're a child, who's lived in a childish world, where
you've played with thoughts and words. You've lived in the erroneous
belief that language, a material thing, can be a vehicle for anything
so subtle as thoughts and feelings. We've discovered that error, and
therefore speak as little as possible; for we are aware of, and can
divine, the innermost thoughts of our neighbour. We've so developed
our perceptive faculties by spiritual exercises that we are linked in
a single chain; and can detect a feeling of pleasure and harmony,
when there's complete accord. The Prior, who has trained himself most
rigorously, can feel if anyone's thoughts have strayed into wrong paths.
In some respects he's like--merely like, I say--a telephone engineer's
galvanometer, that shows when and where a current has been interrupted.
Therefore we can have no secrets from one another, and so do not need
the confessional. Think of all this when you confront the searching eye
of the Prior!

STRANGER. Is there any intention of examining me?

CONFESSOR. Oh no. There are merely a few questions to answer without any
deep meaning, before the practical examinations. Quiet! Here they are.

(He goes to one side. The PRIOR enters from the back. He is dressed
entirely in white and he has pulled up his hood. He is a tall man with
long white hair and along white beard-his head is like that of Jupiter.
His face is pale, but full and without wrinkles. His eyes are large,
surrounded by shadows and his eyebrows strongly marked. A quiet,
majestic calm reigns over his whole personality. The PRIOR is followed
by twelve Fathers, dressed in black and white, with black hoods, also
pulled up. All bow to the crucifix and then go to their places.)

PRIOR (after looking at the STRANGER for a moment.) What do you seek
here? (The STRANGER is confused and tries to find an answer, but cannot.
The PRIOR goes on, calmly, firmly, but indulgently.) Peace? Isn't that
so? (The STRANGER makes a sign of assent with head and mouth.) But if
the whole of life is a struggle, how can you find peace amongst the
living? (The STRANGER is not able to answer.) Do you want to turn your
back on life because you feel you've been injured, cheated?

STRANGER (in a weak voice). Yes.

PRIOR. So you've been defrauded, unjustly dealt with? And this injustice
began so early that you, an innocent child, couldn't imagine you'd
committed any crime that was worthy of punishment. Well, once you were
unjustly accused of stealing fruit; tormented into taking the offence
on yourself; tortured into telling lies about yourself and forced to beg
forgiveness for a fault you'd not committed. Wasn't it so?

STRANGER (with certainty). Yes. It was.

PRIOR. It was; and you've never been able to forget it. Never. Now
listen, you've a good memory; can you remember _The Swiss Family
Robinson_?

STRANGER (shrinking). _The Swiss Family Robinson_?

PRIOR. Yes. Those events that caused you such mental torture happened in
1857, but at Christmas 1856, that is the year before, you tore a copy
of that book and out of fear of punishment hid it under a chest in the
kitchen. (The STRANGER is taken aback.) The wardrobe was painted in oak
graining, and clothes hung in its upper part, whilst shoes stood below.
This wardrobe seemed enormously big to you, for you were a small child,
and you couldn't imagine it could ever be moved; but during spring
cleaning at Easter what was hidden was brought to light. Fear drove you
to put the blame on a schoolfellow. And now he had to endure torture,
because appearances were against him, for you were thought to be
trustworthy. After this the history of your sorrows comes as a logical
sequence. You accept this logic?

STRANGER. Yes. Punish me!

PRIOR. No. I don't punish; when I was a child I did--similar things. But
will you now promise to forget this history of your own sufferings for
all time and never to recount it again?

STRANGER. I promise! If only he whom I took advantage of could forgive
me.

PRIOR. He has already. Isn't that so, Pater Isidor?

ISIDOR (who was the DOCTOR in the first part of 'The Road to Damascus,'
rising). With my whole heart!

STRANGER. It's you!

ISIDOR. Yes. I.

PRIOR (to FATHER ISIDOR). Pater Isidor, say a word, just one.

ISIDOR. It was in the year 1856 that I had to endure my torture. But
even in 1854 one of my brothers suffered in the same way, owing to a
false accusation on my part. (To the STRANGER.) So we're all guilty and
not one of us is without blemish; and I believe my victim had no clear
conscience either. (He sits down.)

PRIOR. If we could only stop accusing one another and particularly
Eternal Justice! But we're born in guilt and all resemble Adam! (To the
STRANGER.) There was something you wanted to know, was there not?

STRANGER. I wanted to know life's inmost meaning.

PRIOR. The very innermost! So you wanted to learn what no man's
permitted to know. Pater Uriel! (PATER URIEL, who is blind, rises. The
PRIOR speaks to the STRANGER.) Look at this blind father! We call him
Uriel in remembrance of Uriel Acosta, whom perhaps you've heard of? (The
STRANGER makes a sign that he has not.) You haven't? All young people
should have heard of him. Uriel Acosta was a Portuguese of Jewish
descent, who, however, was brought up in the Christian faith. When he
was still fairly young he began to inquire--you understand--to inquire
if Christ were really God; with the result that he went over to the
Jewish faith. And then he began research into the Mosaic writings and
the immortality of the soul, with the result that the Rabbis handed him
over to the Christian priesthood for punishment. A long time after
he returned to the Jewish faith. But his thirst for knowledge knew
no bounds, and he continued his researches till he found he'd reached
absolute nullity; and in despair that he couldn't learn the final secret
he took his own life with a pistol shot. (Pause.) Now look at our good
father Uriel here. He, too, was once very young and anxious to know; he
always wanted to be in the forefront of every modern movement, and he
discovered new philosophies. I may add, by the way, that he's a friend
of my boyhood and almost as old as I. Now about 1820 he came upon the
so-called rational philosophy, that had already lain in its grave for
twenty years. With this system of thought, which was supposed to be a
master key, all locks were to be picked, all questions answered and all
opponents confuted--everything was clear and simple. In those days Uriel
was a strong opponent of all religions and in particular followed the
Mesmerists, as the hypnotisers of that age were called. In 1830 our
friend became a Hegelian, though, to be sure, rather late in the day.
Then he re-discovered God, a God who was immanent in nature and in man,
and found he was a little god himself. Now, as ill-luck would have it,
there were two Hegels, just as there were two Voltaires; and the later,
or more conservative Hegel, had developed his All-godhead till it had
become a compromise with the Christian view. And so Father Uriel, who
never wanted to be behind the times, became a rationalistic Christian,
who was given the thankless task of combating Rationalism and himself.
(Pause.) I'll shorten the whole sad history for Father Uriel's sake. In
1850 he again became a materialist and an enemy of Christianity. In
1870 he became a hypnotist, in 1880 a theosophist, and 1890 he wanted to
shoot himself! I met him just at that time. He was sitting on a bench in
Unter den Linden in Berlin, and he was blind. This Uriel was blind--and
Uriel means 'God is my Light'--who for a century had marched with the
torch of liberalism at the head of _every_ modern movement! (To the
STRANGER.) You see, he wanted to know, but he failed! And therefore he
now believes. Is there anything else you'd like to know?

STRANGER. One thing only.

PRIOR. Speak.

STRANGER. If Father Uriel had held to his first faith in 1810, men would
have called him conservative or old-fashioned; but now, as he's followed
the developments of his time and has therefore discarded his youthful
faith, men will call him a renegade--that's to say: whatever he does
mankind will blame him.

PRIOR. Do you heed what men say? Father Clemens, may I tell him how
you heeded what men said? (PATER CLEMENS rises and makes a gesture of
assent.) Father Clemens is our greatest figure painter. In the world
outside he's known by another name, a very famous one. Father Clemens
was a young man in 1830. He felt he had a talent for painting and
gave himself up to it with his whole soul. When he was twenty he was
exhibiting. The public, the critics, his teachers, and his parents
were all of the opinion that he'd made a mistake in the choice of his
profession. Young Clemens heeded what men were saying, so he laid down
his brush and turned bookseller. When he was fifty years of age, and had
his life behind him, the paintings of his early years were discovered by
some stranger; and were then recognised as masterpieces by the public,
the critics, his teachers and relations! But it was too late. And when
Father Clemens complained of the wickedness of the world, the world
answered with a heartless grin: 'Why did you let yourself be taken
in?' Father Clemens grieved so much at this, that he came to us. But he
doesn't grieve any longer now. Or do you, Father Clemens?

CLEMENS. No! But that isn't the end of the story. The paintings I'd done
in 1830 were admired and hung in a museum till 1880. Taste then changed
very quickly, and one day an important newspaper announced that their
presence there was an outrage. So they were banished to the attic.

PRIOR (to the STRANGER). That's a good story!

CLEMENS. But it's still not finished. By 1890 taste had so changed again
that a professor of the History of Art wrote that it was a national
scandal that my works should be hanging in an attic. So the pictures
were brought down again, and, for the time being, are classical. But
for how long? From that you can see, young man, in what worldly fame
consists? Vanitas vanitatum vanitas!

STRANGER. Then is life worth living?

PRIOR. Ask Pater Melcher, who is experienced not only in the world of
deception and error, but also in that of lies and contradictions. Follow
him: he'll show you the picture gallery and tell you stories.

STRANGER. I'll gladly follow anyone who can teach me something.

(PATER MELCHER takes the STRANGER by the hand and leads him out of the
Chapter House.)

Curtain.


SCENE II

PICTURE GALLERY OF THE MONASTERY

[Picture Gallery of the Monastery. There are mostly portraits of people
with two heads.]

MELCHER. Well, first we have here a small landscape, by an unknown
master, called 'The Two Towers.' Perhaps you've been in Switzerland and
know the originals.

STRANGER. I've been in Switzerland!

MELCHER. Exactly. Then near the station of Amsteg on the Gotthard
railway you've seen a tower, called Zwing-Uri, sung of by Schiller
in his _Wilhelm Tell_. It stands there as a monument to the cruel
oppression which the inhabitants of Uri suffered at the hands of
the German Emperors. Good! On the Italian side of the Gotthard lies
Bellinzona, as you know. There are many towers to be seen there, but the
most curious is called Castel d'Uri. That's the monument recalling the
cruel oppression which the Italian cantons suffered at the hands of the
inhabitants of Uri! Now do you understand?

STRANGER. So freedom means: freedom to oppress others. That's new to me.

MELCHER. Then let's go on without further comment to the portrait
collection. Number one in the catalogue. Boccaccio, with two heads--all
our portraits have at least two heads. His story's well known. The great
man began his career by writing dissolute and godless tales, which
he dedicated to Queen Johanna of Naples, who'd seduced the son of St.
Brigitta. Boccaccio ended up as a saint in a monastery where he lectured
on Dante's Hell and the devils that, in his youth, he had thought to
drive out in a most original way. You'll notice now, how the two faces
are meeting each other's gaze!

STRANGER. Yes. But all trace of humour's lacking; and humour's to be
expected in a man who knew himself as well as our friend Boccaccio did.

MELCHER. Number two in the catalogue. Ah, yes; that's two-headed Doctor
Luther. The youthful champion of tolerance and the aged upholder of
intolerance. Have I said enough?

STRANGER. Quite enough.

MELCHER. Number three in the catalogue. The great Gustavus Adolphus
accepting Catholic funds from Cardinal Richelieu in order to fight for
Protestantism, whilst remaining neutral in the face of the Catholic
League.

STRANGER. How do Protestants explain this threefold contradiction?

MELCHER. They say it's not true. Number four in the catalogue. Schiller,
the author of The Robbers, who was offered the freedom of the City of
Paris by the leaders of the French Revolution in 1792; but who had been
made a State Councillor of Meiningen as early as 1790 and a royal Danish
Stipendiary in 1791. The scene depicts the State Councillor--and friend
of his Excellency Goethe--receiving the Diploma of Honour from the
leaders of the French Revolution as late as 1798. Think of it, the
diploma of the Reign of Terror in the year 1798, when the Revolution was
over and the country under the Directory! I'd have liked to have seen
the Councillor and his friend, His Excellency! But it didn't matter,
for two years later he repaid his nomination by writing the _Song of the
Bell_, in which he expressed his thanks and begged the revolutionaries
to keep quiet! Well, that's life. We're intelligent people and love _The
Robbers_ as much as _The Song of the Bell_; Schiller as much as Goethe!

STRANGER. The work remains, the master perishes.

MELCHER. Goethe, yes! Number five in the catalogue. He began with
Strassburg cathedral and _Götz von Berlichingen_, two hurrahs for gothic
Germanic art against that of Greece and Rome. Later he fought against
Germanism and for Classicism. Goethe against Goethe! There you see the
traditional Olympic calm, harmony, etc., in the greatest disharmony
with itself. But depression at this turns into uneasiness when the
young Romantic school appears and combats the Goethe of _Iphigenia_ with
theories drawn from Goethe's _Goetz_. That the 'great heathen' ends up
by converting Faust in the Second Part, and allowing him to be saved by
the Virgin Mary and the angels, is usually passed over in silence by his
admirers. Also the fact that a man of such clear vision should, towards
the end of his life, have found everything so 'strange,' and 'curious,'
even the simplest facts that he'd previously seen through. His last
wish was for 'more light'! Yes; but it doesn't matter. We're intelligent
people and love our Goethe just the same.

STRANGER. And rightly.

MELCHER. Number six in the catalogue. Voltaire! He has more than two
heads. The Godless One, who spent his whole life defending God. The
Mocker, who was mocked, because 'he believed in God like a child.' The
author of the cynical 'Candide,' who wrote:

        In my youth I sought the pleasures
        Of the senses, but I learned
        That their sweetness was illusion
        Soon to bitterness it turned.
        In old age I've come to see
        Life is nought but vanity.

Dr. Knowall, who thought he could grasp everything between Heaven and
Earth by means of reason and science, sings like this, when he comes to
the end of his life:

        I had thought to find in knowledge
        Light to guide me on my way;
        Yet I still must walk in darkness
        All that's known must soon decay.
        Ignorance, I turn to thee!
        Knowledge is but vanity.

But that's no matter! Voltaire can be put to many uses. The Jews use
him against the Christians, and the Christians use him against the Jews,
because he was an anti-Semite, like Luther. Chateaubriand used him
to defend Catholicism, and Protestants use him even to-day to attack
Catholicism. He was a fine fellow!

STRANGER. Then what's your view?

MELCHER. We have no views here; we've faith, as I've told you already.
And that's why we've only one head--placed exactly above the heart.
(Pause.) In the meantime let's look at number seven in the catalogue.
Ah, Napoleon! The creation of the Revolution itself! The Emperor of the
People, the Nero of Freedom, the suppressor of Equality and the 'big
brother' of Fraternity. He's the most cunning of all the two-headed, for
he could laugh at himself, raise himself above his own contradictions,
change his skin and his soul, and yet be quite explicable to himself in
every transformation--convinced, self-authorised. There's only one other
man who can be compared with him in this; Kierkegaard the Dane. From
the beginning he was aware of this parthenogenesis of the soul, whose
capacity to multiply by taking cuttings was equivalent to bringing forth
young in this life without conception. And for that reason, and so as
not to become life's fool, he wrote under a number of pseudonyms, of
which each one constituted a 'stage on his life's way.' But did you
realise this? The Lord of life, in spite of all these precautions, made
a fool of him after all. Kierkegaard, who fought all his life against
the priesthood and the professional preachers of the State Church,
was eventually forced of necessity to become a professional preacher
himself! Oh yes! Such things do happen.

STRANGER. The Powers That Be play tricks....

MELCHER. The Powers play tricks on tricksters, and delude the arrogant,
particularly those who alone believe they possess truth and knowledge!
Number eight in the catalogue. Victor Hugo. He split himself into
countless parts. He was a peer of France, a Grandee of Spain, a friend
of Kings, and the socialist author of _Les Misérables_. The peers
naturally called him a renegade, and the socialists a reformer. Number
nine. Count Friedrich Leopold von Stollberg. He wrote a fanatical book
for the Protestants, and then suddenly became a Catholic! Inexplicable
in a sensible man. A miracle, eh? A little journey to Damascus,
perhaps? Number ten. Lafayette. The heroic upholder of freedom,
the revolutionary, who was forced to leave France as a suspected
reactionary, because he wanted to help Louis XVI; and then was captured
by the Austrians and carried off to Olmütz as a revolutionary! What was
he in reality?

STRANGER. Both!

MELCHER. Yes, both. He had the two halves that made a whole--a whole
man. Number eleven. Bismarck. A paradox. The honest diplomat, who
maintained he'd discovered that to tell the truth was the greatest of
ruses. And so was compelled--by the Powers, I suppose?--to spend the
last six years of his life unmasking himself as a conscious liar. You're
tired. Then we'll stop now.

STRANGER. Yes, if one clings to the same ideas all one's life, and holds
the same opinions, one grows old according to nature's laws, and gets
called conservative, old-fashioned, out of date. But if one goes on
developing, keeping pace with one's own age, renewing oneself with the
perennially youthful impulses of contemporary thought, one's called a
waverer and a renegade.

MELCHER. That's as old as the world! But does an intelligent, man heed
what he's called? One is, what one's becoming.

STRANGER. But who revises the periodically changing views of
contemporary opinion?

MELCHER. You ought to answer that yourself, and indeed in this way. It
is the Powers themselves who promulgate contemporary opinion, as they
develop in _apparent_ circles. Hegel, the philosopher of the present,
himself dimorphous, for both a 'left'-minded and a 'right'-minded Hegel
can always be quoted, has best explained the contradictions of life,
of history and of the spirit, with his own magic formula. Thesis:
affirmation; Antithesis: negation; Synthesis: comprehension! Young
man, or rather, comparatively young man! You began life by accepting
everything, then went on to denying everything on principle. Now end
your life by comprehending everything. Be exclusive no longer. Do
not say: either--or, but: not only--but also! In a word, or two words
rather, Humanity and Resignation!

Curtain.


SCENE III

CHAPEL OF THE MONASTERY

[Choir of the Monastery Chapel. An open coffin with a bier cloth and two
burning candles. The CONFESSOR leads in the STRANGER by the hand. The
STRANGER is dressed in the white shirt of the novice.]

CONFESSOR. Have you carefully considered the step you wish to take?

STRANGER. Very carefully.

CONFESSOR. Have you no more questions?

STRANGER. Questions? No.

CONFESSOR. Then stay here, whilst I fetch the Chapter and the Fathers
and Brothers, so that the solemn act may begin.

STRANGER. Yes. Let it come to pass.

(The CONFESSOR goes out. The STRANGER, left alone, is sunk in thought.)

TEMPTER (coming forward). Are you ready?

STRANGER. So ready, that I've no answer left for you.

TEMPTER. On the brink of the grave, I understand! You'll have to lie in
your coffin and appear to die; the old Adam will be covered with three
shovelfuls of earth, and a De Profundis will be sung. Then you'll rise
again from the dead, having laid aside your old name, and be baptized
once more like a new-born child! What will you be called? (The STRANGER
does not reply.) It is written: Johannes, brother Johannes, because he
preached in the wilderness and...

STRANGER. Do not trouble me.

TEMPTER. Speak to me a little, before you depart into the long silence.
For you'll not be allowed to speak for a whole year.

STRANGER. All the better. Speaking at last becomes a vice, like
drinking. And why speak, if words do not cloak thoughts?

TEMPTER. _You_ at the graveside.... Was life so bitter?

STRANGER. Yes. My life was.

TEMPTER. Did you never know one pleasure?

STRANGER. Yes, many pleasures; but they were very brief and seemed only
to exist in order to make the pain of their loss the sharper.

TEMPTER. Can't it be put the other way round: that pain exists in order
to make joy more keen?

STRANGER. It can be put in any way.

(A woman enters with a child to be baptized.)

TEMPTER. Look! A little mortal, who's to be consecrated to suffering.

STRANGER. Poor child!

TEMPTER. A human history, that's about to begin. (A bridal couple cross
the stage.) And there--what's loveliest, and most bitter. Adam and Eve
in Paradise, that in a week will be a Hell, and in a fortnight Paradise
again.

STRANGER. What is loveliest, brightest! The first, the only, the last
that ever gave life meaning! I, too, once sat in the sunlight on a
verandah, in the spring beneath the first tree to show new green, and a
small crown crowned a head, and a white veil lay like thin morning mist
over a face... that was not that of a human being. Then came darkness!

TEMPTER. Whence?

STRANGER. From the light itself. I know no more.

TEMPTER. It could only have been a shadow, for light is needed to throw
shadows; but for darkness no light is needed.

STRANGER. Stop! Or we'll never come to an end.

(The CONFESSOR and the CHAPTER appear in procession.)

TEMPTER (disappearing). Farewell!

CONFESSOR (advancing with a large black bier-cloth). Lord! Grant him
eternal peace!

CHOIR. May he be illumined with perpetual light!

CONFESSOR (wrapping the STRANGER to the bier-cloth). May he rest in
peace!

CHOIR. Amen!

Curtain.

THE FATHER


CHARACTERS

     A CAPTAIN OF CAVALRY
     LAURA, his wife
     BERTHA, their daughter
     DOCTOR OSTERMARK
     THE PASTOR
     THE NURSE
     NÖJD
     AN ORDERLY




ACT I.

[The sitting room at the Captain's. There is a door a little to the
right at the back. In the middle of the room, a large, round table
strewn with newspapers and magazines. To right a leather-covered sofa
and table. In the right-hand corner a private door. At left there is a
door leading to the inner room and a desk with a clock on it. Gamebags,
guns and other arms hang on the walls. Army coats hang near door at
back. On the large table stands a lighted lamp.]

CAPTAIN [rings, an orderly comes in.]

ORDERLY. Yes, Captain.

CAPTAIN. Is Nöjd out there?

ORDERLY. He is waiting for orders in the kitchen.

CAPTAIN. In the kitchen again, is he? Send him in at once.

ORDERLY. Yes, Captain. [Goes.]

PASTOR. What's the matter now?

CAPTAIN. Oh the rascal has been cutting up with the servant-girl again;
he's certainly a bad lot.

PASTOR. Why, Nöjd got into the same trouble year before last, didn't he?

CAPTAIN. Yes, you remember? Won't you be good enough to give him a
friendly talking to and perhaps you can make some impression on him.
I've sworn at him and flogged him, too, but it hasn't had the least
effect.

PASTOR. And so you want me to preach to him? What effect do you suppose
the word of God will have on a rough trooper?

CAPTAIN. Well, it certainly has no effect on me.

PASTOR. I know that well enough.

CAPTAIN. Try it on him, anyway.

[Nöjd comes in.]

CAPTAIN. What have you been up to now, Nöjd?

NÖJD. God save you, Captain, but I couldn't talk about it with the
Pastor here.

PASTOR. Don't be afraid of me, my boy.

CAPTAIN. You had better confess or you know what will happen.

NÖJD. Well, you see it was like this; we were at a dance at Gabriel's,
and then--then Ludwig said--

CAPTAIN. What has Ludwig got to do with it? Stick to the truth.

NÖJD. Yes, and Emma said "Let's go into the barn--"

CAPTAIN.--Oh, so it was Emma who led you astray, was it?

NÖJD. Well, not far from it. You know that unless the girl is willing
nothing ever happens.

CAPTAIN. Never mind all that: Are you the father of the child or not?

NÖJD. Who knows?

CAPTAIN. What's that? Don't you know?

NÖJD. Why no--that is, you can never be sure.

CAPTAIN. Weren't you the only one?

NÖJD. Yes, that time, but you can't be sure for all that.

CAPTAIN. Are you trying to put the blame on Ludwig? Is that what you are
up to?

NÖJD. Well, you see it isn't easy to know who is to blame.

CAPTAIN. Yes, but you told Emma you would marry her.

NÖJD. Oh, a fellow's always got to say that--

CAPTAIN [to Pastor.] This is terrible, isn't it?

PASTOR. It's the old story over again. See here, Nöjd, you surely ought
to know whether you are the father or not?

NÖJD. Well, of course I was mixed up with the girl--but you know
yourself, Pastor, that it needn't amount to anything for all that.

PASTOR. Look here, my lad, we are talking about you now. Surely you
won't leave the girl alone with the child. I suppose we can't compel you
to marry her, but you should provide for the child--that you shall do!

NÖJD. Well, then, so must Ludwig, too.

CAPTAIN. Then the case must go to the courts. I cannot ferret out the
truth of all this, nor is it to my liking. So now be off.

PASTOR. One moment, Nöjd. H'm--don't you think it dishonorable to leave
a girl destitute like that with her child? Don't you think so? Don't you
see that such conduct-- -- --h'm-- --h'm-- -- --

NÖJD. Yes, if I only knew for sure that I was father of the child, but
you can't be sure of that, Pastor, and I don't see much fun slaving all
your life for another man's child. Surely you, Pastor, and the Captain
can understand for yourselves.

CAPTAIN. Be off.

NÖJD. God save you, Captain. [Goes.]

CAPTAIN. But keep out of the kitchen, you rascal! [To Pastor.] Now, why
didn't you get after him?

PASTOR. What do you mean?

CAPTAIN. Why, you only sat and mumbled something or other.

PASTOR. To tell the truth I really don't know what to say. It is a pity
about the girl, yes, and a pity about the lad, too. For think if he
were not the father. The girl can nurse the child for four months at the
orphanage, and then it will be permanently provided for, but it will
be different for him. The girl can get a good place afterwards in
some respectable family, but the lad's future may be ruined if he is
dismissed from the regiment.

CAPTAIN. Upon my soul I should like to be in the magistrate's shoes and
judge this case. The lad is probably not innocent, one can't be sure,
but we do know that the girl is guilty, if there is any guilt in the
matter.

PASTOR. Well, well, I judge no one. But what were we talking about
when this stupid business interrupted us? It was about Bertha and her
confirmation, wasn't it?

CAPTAIN. Yes, but it was certainly not in particular about her
confirmation but about her whole welfare. This house is full of women
who all want to have their say about my child. My mother-in-law wants
to make a Spiritualist of her. Laura wants her to be an artist; the
governess wants her to be a Methodist, old Margret a Baptist, and the
servant-girls want her to join the Salvation Army! It won't do to try to
make a soul in patches like that. I, who have the chief right to try to
form her character, am constantly opposed in my efforts. And that's why
I have decided to send her away from home.

PASTOR. You have too many women trying to run this house.

CAPTAIN. You're right! It's like going into a cage full of tigers, and
if I didn't hold a red-hot iron under their noses they would tear me to
pieces any moment. And you laugh, you rascal! Wasn't it enough that I
married your sister, without your palming off your old stepmother on me?

PASTOR. But, good heavens, one can't have stepmothers in one's own
house!

CAPTAIN. No, you think it is better to have mothers-in-law in some one
else's house!

PASTOR. Oh well, we all have some burden in life.

CAPTAIN. But mine is certainly too heavy. I have my old nurse into the
bargain, who treats me as if I ought still to wear a bib. She is a good
old soul, to be sure, and she must not be dragged into such talk.

PASTOR. You must keep a tight rein on the women folks. You let them run
things too much.

CAPTAIN. Now will you please inform me how I'm to keep order among the
women folk?

PASTOR. Laura was brought up with a firm hand, but although she is my
own sister, I must admit she _was_ pretty troublesome.

CAPTAIN. Laura certainly has her faults, but with her it isn't so
serious.

PASTOR. Oh, speak out--I know her.

CAPTAIN. She was brought up with romantic ideas, and it has been hard
for her to find herself, but she is my wife--

PASTOR And because she is your wife she is the best of wives? No, my
dear fellow, it is she who really wears on you most.

CAPTAIN. Well, anyway, the whole house is topsy-turvy. Laura won't let
Bertha leave her, and I can't allow her to remain in this bedlam.

PASTOR. Oh, so Laura won't? Well, then, I'm afraid you are in for
trouble. When she was a child if she set her mind on anything she used
to play dead dog till she got it, and then likely as not she would give
it back, explaining that it wasn't the thing she wanted, but having her
own way.

CAPTAIN. So she was like that even then? H'm--she really gets into such
a passion sometimes that I am anxious about her and afraid she is ill.

PASTOR. But what do you want to do with Bertha that is so unpardonable?
Can't you compromise?

CAPTAIN. You mustn't think I want to make a prodigy of her or an image
of myself. I don't want to be it procurer for my daughter and educate
her exclusively for matrimony, for then if she were left unmarried she
might have bitter days. On the other hand, I don't want to influence her
toward a career that requires a long course of training which would be
entirely thrown away if she should marry.

PASTOR. What do you want, then?

CAPTAIN. I want her to be it teacher. If she remains unmarried she will
be able to support herself, and at any rate she wouldn't be any worse
off than the poor schoolmasters who have to share their salaries with a
family. If she marries she can use her knowledge in the education of her
children. Am I right?

PASTOR. Quite right. But, on the other hand, hasn't she shown such
talent for painting that it would be a great pity to crush it?

CAPTAIN. No! I have shown her sketches to an eminent painter, and he
says they are only the kind of thing that can be learned at schools. But
then a young fop came here in the summer who, of course, understands the
matter much better, and he declared that she had colossal genius, and so
that settled it to Laura's satisfaction.

PASTOR. Was he quite taken with Bertha?

CAPTAIN. That goes without saying.

PASTOR. Then God help you, old man, for in that case I see no hope. This
is pretty bad--and, of course, Laura has her supporters--in there?

CAPTAIN. Yes, you may be sure of that; the whole house is already up in
arms, and, between ourselves, it is not exactly a noble conflict that is
being waged from that quarter.

PASTOR. Don't you think I know that?

CAPTAIN. You do?

PASTOR. I do.

CAPTAIN. But the worst of it is, it strikes me that Bertha's future
is being decided from spiteful motives. They hint that men better be
careful, because women can do this or that now-a-days. All day long,
incessantly, it is a conflict between man and woman. Are you going? No,
stay for supper. I have no special inducements to offer, but do stay.
You know I am expecting the new doctor. Have you seen him?

PASTOR. I caught a glimpse of him as I came along. He looked pleasant,
and reliable.

CAPTAIN. That's good. Do you think it possible he may become my ally?

PASTOR. Who can tell? It depends on how much he has been among women.

CAPTAIN. But won't you really stay?

PASTOR. No thanks, my dear fellow; I promised to be home for supper, and
the wife gets uneasy if I am late.

CAPTAIN. Uneasy? Angry, you mean. Well, as you will. Let me help you
with your coat.

PASTOR. It's certainly pretty cold tonight. Thanks. You must take care
of your health, Adolf, you seem rather nervous.

CAPTAIN. Nervous?

PASTOR. Yes, you are not, really very well.

CAPTAIN. Has Laura put that into your head? She has treated me for the
last twenty years as if I were at the point of death.

PASTOR. Laura? No, but you make me uneasy about you. Take care of
yourself--that's my advice! Good-bye, old man; but didn't you want to
talk about the confirmation?

CAPTAIN. Not at all! I assure you that matter will have to take its
course in the ordinary way at the cost of the clerical conscience for I
am neither a believer nor a martyr.

PASTOR. Good-bye. Love to Laura. [Goes.]

[The Captain opens his desk and seats himself at it. Takes up account
books.]

CAPTAIN [Figuring.] Thirty-four--nine, forty-three--seven, eight,
fifty-six--

LAURA [Coming in from inner room.] Will you be kind enough--

CAPTAIN. Just a moment! Sixty-six--seventy-one, eighty-four,
eighty-nine, ninety-two, a hundred. What is it?

LAURA. Am I disturbing you?

CAPTAIN. Not at all. Housekeeping money, I suppose?

LAURA. Yes, housekeeping money.

CAPTAIN. Put the accounts down there and I will go over them.

LAURA. The accounts?

CAPTAIN. Yes.

LAURA. Am I to keep accounts now?

CAPTAIN. Of course you are to keep accounts. Our affairs are in a
precarious condition, and in case of a liquidation, accounts are
necessary, or one is liable to punishment for being careless.

LAURA. It's not my fault that our affairs are in a precarious condition.

CAPTAIN. That is exactly what the accounts will decide.

LAURA. It's not my fault that our tenant doesn't pay.

CAPTAIN. Who recommended this tenant so warmly? You! Why did you
recommend a--good-for-nothing, we'll call him?

LAURA. But why did you rent to this good-for-nothing?

CAPTAIN. Because I was not allowed to eat in peace, nor sleep in peace,
nor work in peace, till you women got that man here. You wanted him so
that your brother might be rid of him, your mother wanted him because
I didn't want him, the governess wanted him because he reads his Bible,
and old Margret because she had known his grandmother from childhood.
That's why he was taken, and if he hadn't been taken, I'd be in a
madhouse by now or lying in my grave. However, here is the housekeeping
money and your pin money. You may give me the accounts later.

LAURA [Curtesies.] Thanks so much. Do you too keep an account of what
you spend besides the housekeeping money?

CAPTAIN. That doesn't concern you.

LAURA. No, that's true--just as little as my child's education
concerns me. Have the gentlemen come to a decision after this evening's
conference?

CAPTAIN. I had already come to a decision, and therefore it only
remained for me to talk it over with the one friend I and the family
have in common. Bertha is to go to boarding school in town, and starts
in a fortnight.

LAURA. To which boarding school, if I may venture to ask?

CAPTAIN. Professor Säfberg's.

LAURA. That free thinker!

CAPTAIN. According to the law, children are to be brought up in their
father's faith.

LAURA. And the mother has no voice in the matter?

CAPTAIN. None whatever. She has sold her birthright by a legal
transaction, and forfeited her rights in return for the man's
responsibility of caring for her and her children.

LAURA. That is to say she has no rights concerning her child.

CAPTAIN. No, none at all. When once one has sold one's goods, one cannot
have them back and still keep the money.

LAURA. But if both father and mother should agree?

CAPTAIN. Do you think that could ever happen? I want her to live in
town, you want her to stay at home. The arithmetical result would be
that she remain at the railway station midway between train and home.
This is a knot that cannot be untied, you see.

LAURA. Then it must be broken. What did Nöjd want here?

CAPTAIN. That is an official secret.

LAURA. Which the whole kitchen knows!

CAPTAIN. Good, then you must know it.

LAURA. I do know it.

CAPTAIN. And have your judgment ready-made?

LAURA. My judgment is the judgment of the law.

CAPTAIN. But it is not written in the law who the child's father is.

LAURA. No, but one usually knows that.

CAPTAIN. Wise minds claim that one can never know.

LAURA. That's strange. Can't one ever know who the father of a child is?

CAPTAIN. No; so they claim.

LAURA. How extraordinary! How can the father have such control over the
children then?

CAPTAIN. He has control only when he has assumed the responsibilities of
the child, or has had them forced upon him. But in wedlock, of course,
there is no doubt about the fatherhood.

LAURA. There are no doubts then?

CAPTAIN. Well, I should hope not.

LAURA. But if the wife has been unfaithful?

CAPTAIN. That's another matter. Was there anything else you wanted to
say?

LAURA. Nothing.

CAPTAIN. Then I shall go up to my room, and perhaps you will be kind
enough to let me know when the doctor arrives. [Closes desk and rises]

LAURA. Certainly.

[Captain goes through the primate door right.]

CAPTAIN. As soon as he comes. For I don't want to seem rude to him, you
understand. [Goes.]

LAURA. I understand. [Looks at the money she holds in her hands.]

MOTHER-IN-LAW'S VOICE [Within.] Laura!

LAURA. Yes.

MOTHER-IN-LAW'S VOICE. Is my tea ready?

LAURA [In doorway to inner room]. In just a moment.

[Laura goes toward hall door at back as the orderly opens it.]

ORDERLY. Doctor Ostermark.

DOCTOR. Madam!

LAURA [Advances and offers her hand]. Welcome, Doctor--you are heartily
welcome. The Captain is out, but he will be back soon.

DOCTOR. I hope you will excuse my coming so late, but I have already
been called upon to pay some professional visits.

LAURA. Sit down, won't you?

DOCTOR. Thank you.

LAURA. Yes, there is a great deal of illness in the neighborhood just
now, but I hope it will agree with you here. For us country people
living in such isolation it is of great value to find a doctor who
is interested in his patients, and I hear so many nice things of you,
Doctor, that I hope the pleasantest relations will exist between us.

DOCTOR. You are indeed kind, and I hope for your sake my visits to you
will not often be caused by necessity. Your family is, I believe, as a
rule in good health--

LAURA. Fortunately we have bear spared acute illnesses, but still things
are not altogether as they should be.

DOCTOR. Indeed?

LAURA. Heaven knows, things are not as might be wished.

DOCTOR. Really, you alarm me.

LAURA. There are some circumstances in a family which through honor and
conscience one is forced to conceal from the whole world--

DOCTOR. Excepting the doctor.

LAURA. Exactly. It is, therefore, my painful duty to tell you the whole
truth immediately.

DOCTOR. Shouldn't we postpone this conference until I have had the honor
of being introduced to the Captain?

LAURA. No! You must hear me before seeing him.

DOCTOR. It relates to him then?

LAURA. Yes, to him, my poor, dear husband.

DOCTOR. You alarm me, indeed, and believe me, I sympathize with your
misfortune.

LAURA [Taking out handkerchief]. My husband's mind is affected. Now you
know all, and may judge for yourself when you see him.

DOCTOR. What do you say? I have read the Captain's excellent treatises
on mineralogy with admiration, and have found that they display a clear
and powerful intellect.

LAURA. Really? How happy I should be if we should all prove to be
mistaken.

DOCTOR. But of course it is possible that his mind might be affected in
other directions.

LAURA. That is just what we fear, too. You see he has sometimes the most
extraordinary ideas which, of course, one might expect in a learned man,
if they did not have a disastrous effect on the welfare of his whole
family. For instance, one of his whims is buying all kinds of things.

DOCTOR. That is serious; but what does he buy?

LAURA. Whole boxes of books that he never reads.

DOCTOR. There is nothing strange about a scholar's buying books.

LAURA. You don't believe what I am saying?

DOCTOR. Well, Madam, I am convinced that you believe what you are
saying.

LAURA. Tell me, is it reasonable to think that one can see what is
happening on another planet by looking through a microscope?

DOCTOR. Does he say he can do that?

LAURA. Yes, that's what he says.

DOCTOR. Through a microscope?

LAURA. Through a microscope, yes.

DOCTOR. This is serious, if it is so.

LAURA. If it is so! Then you have no faith in me, Doctor, and here I sit
confiding the family secret to--

DOCTOR. Indeed, Madam, I am honored by your confidence, but as a
physician I must investigate and observe before giving an opinion. Has
the Captain ever shown any symptoms of indecision or instability of
will?

LAURA. Has he! We have been married twenty years, and he has never yet
made a decision without changing his mind afterward.

DOCTOR. Is he obstinate?

LAURA. He always insists on having his own way, but once he has got it
he drops the whole matter and asks me to decide.

DOCTOR. This is serious, and demands close observation. The will, you
see, is the mainspring of the mind, and if it is affected the whole mind
goes to pieces.

LAURA. God knows how I have taught myself to humor his wishes through
all these long years of trial. Oh, if you knew what a life I have
endured with him--if you only knew.

DOCTOR. Your misfortune touches me deeply, and I promise you to see what
can be done. I pity you with all my heart, and I beg you to trust
me completely. But after what I have heard I must ask you to avoid
suggesting any ideas that might make a deep impression on the patient,
for in a weak brain they develop rapidly and quickly turn to monomania
or fixed ideas.

LAURA. You mean to avoid arousing suspicions?

DOCTOR. Exactly. One can make the insane believe anything, just because
they are receptive to everything.

LAURA. Indeed? Then I understand. Yes--yes. [A bell rings within.]
Excuse me, my mother wishes to speak to me. One moment-- --Ah, here is
Adolf.

[Captain comes in through private door.]

CAPTAIN. Oh, here already, Doctor? You are very welcome.

DOCTOR. Captain! It is a very great pleasure to me to make the
acquaintance of so celebrated a man of science.

CAPTAIN. Oh, I beg of you. The duties of service do not allow me to make
any very profound investigations, but I believe I am now really on the
track of a discovery.

DOCTOR. Indeed?

CAPTAIN. You see, I have submitted meteoric stones to spectrum analysis,
with the result that I have found carbon, that, is to say, a clear trace
of organic life. What do you say to that?

DOCTOR. Can you see that with it microscope?

CAPTAIN. Lord, no--with the spectroscope.

DOCTOR. The spectroscope! Pardon. Then you will soon be able to tell us
what is happening on Jupiter.

CAPTAIN. Not what is happening, but what has happened. If only the
confounded booksellers in Paris would send me the books; but I believe
all the booksellers in the universe have conspired against me. Think
of it, for the last two months not a single one has ever answered my
communications, neither letters nor abusive telegrams. I shall go mad
over it, and I can't imagine what's the matter.

DOCTOR. Oh, I suppose it's the usual carelessness; you mustn't let it
vex you so.

CAPTAIN. But the devil of it is I shall not get my treatise done in
time, and I know they are working along the same lines in Berlin. But we
shouldn't be talking about this--but about you. If you care to live here
we have rooms for you in the wing, or perhaps you would rather live in
the old quarters?

DOCTOR. Just as you like.

CAPTAIN. No, as you like. Which is it to be?

DOCTOR. You must decide that, Captain.

CAPTAIN. No, it's not for me to decide. You must say which you prefer. I
have no preference in the matter, none at all.

DOCTOR. Oh, but I really cannot decide.

CAPTAIN. For heaven's sake, Doctor, say which you prefer. I have no
choice in the matter, no opinion, no wishes. Haven't you got character
enough to know what you want? Answer me, or I shall be provoked.

DOCTOR. Well, if it rests with me, I prefer to live here.

CAPTAIN. Thank you--forgive me, Doctor, but nothing annoys me so touch
as to see people undecided about anything. [Nurse comes in.] Oh, there
you are, Margret. Do you happen to know whether the rooms in the wing
are in order for the Doctor?

NURSE. Yes, sir, they are.

CAPTAIN. Very well. Then I won't detain you, Doctor; you must be tired.
Good bye, and welcome once more. I shall see you tomorrow, I hope.

DOCTOR. Good evening, Captain.

CAPTAIN. I daresay that my wife explained conditions here to you a
little, so that you have some idea how the land lies?

DOCTOR. Yes, your excellent wife has given me a few hints about this and
that, such as were necessary to a stranger. Good evening, Captain.

CAPTAIN [To Nurse]. What do you want, you old dear? What is it?

NURSE. Now, little Master Adolf, just listen--

CAPTAIN. Yes, Margret, you are the only one I can listen to without
having spasms.

NURSE. Now, listen, Mr. Adolf. Don't you think you should go half-way
and come to an agreement with Mistress in this fuss over the child? Just
think of a mother--

CAPTAIN. Think of a father, Margret.

NURSE. There, there, there. A father has something besides his child,
but a mother has nothing but her child.

CAPTAIN. Just so, you old dear. She has only one burden, but I have
three, and I have her burden too. Don't you think that I should hold a
better position in the world than that of a poor soldier if I had not
had her and her child?

NURSE. Well, that isn't what I wanted to talk about.

CAPTAIN. I can well believe that, for you wanted to make it appear that
I am in the wrong.

NURSE. Don't you believe, Mr. Adolf, that I wish you well?

CAPTAIN. Yes, dear friend, I do believe it; but you don't know what
is for my good. You see it isn't enough for me to have given the child
life, I want to give her my soul, too.

NURSE. Such things I don't understand. But I do think that you ought to
be able to agree.

CAPTAIN. You are not my friend, Margret.

NURSE. I? Oh, Lord, what are you saying, Mr. Adolf? Do you think I can
forget that you were my child when you were little?

CAPTAIN. Well, you dear, have I forgotten it? You have been like a
mother to me, and always have stood by me when I had everybody against
me, but now, when I really need you, you desert me and go over to the
enemy.

NURSE. The enemy!

CAPTAIN, Yes, the enemy! You know well enough how things are in this
house! You have seen everything from the beginning.

NURSE. Indeed I have seen! But, God knows, why two people should torment
the life out of each other; two people who are otherwise so good and
wish all others well. Mistress is never like that to me or to others--

CAPTAIN. Only to me, I know it. But let me tell you, Margret, if you
desert me now, you will do wrong. For now they have begun to weave a
plot against me, and that doctor is not my friend.

NURSE. Oh, Mr. Adolf, you believe evil about everybody. But you see it's
because you haven't the true faith; that's just what it is.

CAPTAIN. Yes, you and the Baptists have found the only true faith. You
are indeed lucky!

NURSE. Anyway, I'm not unhappy like you, Mr. Adolf. Humble your heart
and you will see that God will make you happy in your love for your
neighbor.

CAPTAIN. It's a strange thing that you no sooner speak of God and love
than your voice becomes hard and your eyes fill with hate. No, Margret,
surely you have not the true faith.

NURSE. Yes, go on being proud and hard in your learning, but it won't
amount to much when it comes to the test.

CAPTAIN. How mightily you talk, humble heart. I know very well that
knowledge is of no use to you women.

NURSE. You ought to be ashamed of yourself. But in spite of everything
old Margret cares most for her great big boy, and he will come back to
the fold when it's stormy weather.

CAPTAIN. Margret! Forgive me, but believe me when I say that there is no
one here who wishes me well but you. Help me, for I feel that something
is going to happen here. What it is, I don't know, but something evil is
on the way. [Scream from within.] What's that? Who's that screaming?

[Berths enters from inner room.]

BERTHA. Father! Father! Help me; save me.

CAPTAIN. My dear child, what is it? Speak!

BERTHA. Help me. She wants to hurt me.

CAPTAIN. Who wants to hurt you? Tell me! Speak!

BERTHA. Grandmother! But it's my fault for I deceived her.

CAPTAIN. Tell me more.

BERTHA. Yes, but you mustn't say anything about it. Promise me you
won't.

CAPTAIN. Tell me what it is then.

[Nurse goes.]

BERTHA. In the evening she generally turns down the lamp and then she
makes me sit at a table holding a pen over a piece of paper. And then
she says that the spirits are to write.

CAPTAIN. What's all this--and you have never told me about it?

BERTHA. Forgive me, but I dared not, for Grandmother says the spirits
take revenge if one talks about them. And then the pen writes, but I
don't know whether I'm doing it or not. Sometimes it goes well, but
sometimes it won't go at all, and when I am tired nothing comes, but
she wants it to come just the same. And tonight I thought I was writing
beautifully, but then grandmother said it was all from Stagnelius, and
that I had deceived her, and then she got terribly angry.

CAPTAIN. Do you believe that there are spirits?

BERTHA. I don't know.

CAPTAIN. But I know that there are none.

BERTHA. But Grandmother says that you don't understand, Father, and that
you do much worse things--you who can see to other planets.

CAPTAIN. Does she say that! Does she say that? What else does she say?

BERTHA. She says that you can't work witchery.

CAPTAIN. I never said that I could. You know what meteoric stones
are,--stones that fall from other heavenly bodies. I can examine them
and learn whether they contain the same elements as our world. That is
all I can tell.

BERTHA. But Grandmother says that there are things that she can see
which you cannot see.

CAPTAIN. Then she lies.

BERTHA. Grandmother doesn't tell lies.

CAPTAIN. Why doesn't she?

BERTHA. Then Mother tells lies too.

CAPTAIN. H'm!

BERTHA. And if you say that Mother lies, I can never believe in you
again.

CAPTAIN. I have not said so; and so you must believe in me when I tell
you that it is for your future good that you should leave home. Will
you? Will you go to town and learn something useful?

BERTHA. Oh, yes, I should love to go to town, away from here, anywhere.
If I can only see you sometimes--often. Oh, it is so gloomy and awful in
there all the time, like a winter night, but when you come home Father,
it is like a morning in spring when they take off the double windows.

CAPTAIN. My beloved child! My dear child!

BERTHA. But, Father, you'll be good to Mother, won't you? She cries so
often.

CAPTAIN. H'm--then you want to go to town?

BERTHA. Yes, yes.

CAPTAIN. But if Mother doesn't want you to go?

BERTHA. But she must let me.

CAPTAIN. But if she won't?

BERTHA. Well, then, I don't know what will happen. But she must! She
must!

CAPTAIN. Will you ask her?

BERTHA. You must ask her very nicely; she wouldn't pay any attention to
my asking.

CAPTAIN. H'm! Now if you wish it, and I wish it, and she doesn't wish
it, what shall we do then?

BERTHA. Oh, then it will all be in a tangle again! Why can't you both--

[Laura comes in.]

LAURA. Oh, so Bertha is here. Then perhaps we may have her own opinion
as the question of her future has to be decided.

CAPTAIN. The child can hardly have any well-grounded opinion about what
a young girl's life is likely to be, while we, on the contrary, can more
easily estimate what it may be, as we have seen so many young girls grow
up.

LAURA. But as we are of different opinions Bertha must be the one to
decide.

CAPTAIN. No, I let no one usurp my rights, neither women nor children.
Bertha, leave us.

[Bertha goes out.]

LAURA. You were afraid of hearing her opinion, because you thought it
would be to my advantage.

CAPTAIN. I know that she wishes to go away from home, but I know also
that you possess the power of changing her mind to suit your pleasure.

LAURA. Oh, am I really so powerful?

CAPTAIN. Yes, you have a fiendish power of getting your own way; but so
has anyone who does not scruple about, the way it is accomplished. How
did you get Doctor Norling away, for instance, and how did you get this
new doctor here?

LAURA. Yes, how did I manage that?

CAPTAIN. You insulted the other one so much that he left, and made your
brother recommend this fellow.

LAURA. Well, that was quite simple and legitimate. Is Bertha to leave
home now?

CAPTAIN. Yes, she is to start in a fortnight.

LAURA. That is your decision?

CAPTAIN. Yes.

LAURA. Then I must try to prevent it.

CAPTAIN. You cannot.

LAURA. Can't I? Do you really think I would trust my daughter to wicked
people to have her taught that everything her mother has implanted in
her child is mere foolishness? Why, afterward, she would despise me all
the rest of her life!

CAPTAIN. Do you think that a father should allow ignorant and conceited
women to teach his daughter that he is a charlatan?

LAURA. It means less to the father.

CAPTAIN. Why so?

LAURA. Because the mother is closer to the child, as it has been
discovered that no one can tell for a certainty who the father of a
child is.


CAPTAIN. How does that apply to this case?

LAURA. You do not know whether you are Bertha's father or not.

CAPTAIN. I do not know?

LAURA. No; what no one knows, you surely cannot know.

CAPTAIN. Are you joking?

LAURA. No; I am only making use of your own teaching. For that matter,
how do you know that I have not been unfaithful to you?

CAPTAIN. I believe you capable of almost anything, but not that, nor
that you would talk about it if it were true.

LAURA. Suppose that I was prepared to bear anything, even to being
despised and driven out, everything for the sake of being able to keep
and control my child, and that I am truthful now when I declare that
Bertha is my child, but not yours. Suppose--

CAPTAIN. Stop now!

LAURA. Just suppose this. In that case your power would be at an end.

CAPTAIN. When you had proved that I was not the father.

LAURA. That would not be difficult! Would you like me to do so?

CAPTAIN. Stop!

LAURA. Of course I should only need to declare the name of the real
father, give all details of place and time. For instance--when was
Bertha born? In the third year of our marriage.

CAPTAIN. Stop now, or else--

LAURA. Or else, what? Shall we stop now? Think carefully about all you
do and decide, and whatever you do, don't make yourself ridiculous.

CAPTAIN. I consider all this most lamentable.

LAURA. Which makes you all the more ridiculous.

CAPTAIN. And you?

LAURA. Oh, we women are really too clever.

CAPTAIN. That's why one cannot contend with you.

LAURA. Then why provoke contests with a superior enemy?

CAPTAIN. Superior?

LAURA. Yes, it's queer, but I have never looked at a man without knowing
myself to be his superior.

CAPTAIN. Then you shall be made to see your superior for once, so that
you shall never forget it.

LAURA. That will be interesting.

NURSE [comes in]. Supper is served. Will you come in?

LAURA. Very well.

[Captain lingers; sits down with a magazine in an arm chair near table.]

LAURA. Aren't you coming in to supper?

CAPTAIN. No, thanks. I don't want anything.

LAURA. What, are you annoyed?

CAPTAIN. No, but I am not hungry.

LAURA. Come, or they will ask unnecessary questions--be good now. You
won't? Stay there then. [Goes.]

NURSE. Mr. Adolf! What is this all about?

CAPTAIN. I don't know what it is. Can you explain to me why you women
treat an old man as if he were a child?

NURSE. I don't understand it, but it must be because all you men, great
and small, are women's children, every man of you.

CAPTAIN. But no women are born of men. Yes, but I am Bertha's father.
Tell me, Margret, don't you believe it? Don't you?

NURSE. Lord, how silly you are. Of course you are your own child's
father. Come and eat now, and don't sit there and sulk. There, there,
come now.

CAPTAIN. Get out, woman. To hell with the hags. [Goes to private door.]
Svärd, Svärd!

[Orderly comes in.]

ORDERLY. Yes, Captain.

CAPTAIN. Hitch into the covered sleigh at once.

NURSE. Captain, listen to me.

CAPTAIN. Out, woman! At once!

[Orderly goes.]

NURSE. Good Lord, what's going to happen now.

[Captain puts on his cap and coat and prepares to go out.]

CAPTAIN. Don't expect me home before midnight. [Goes.]

NURSE. Lord preserve us, whatever will be the end of this!




ACT II.

[The same scene as in previous act. A lighted lamp is on the table; it
is night. The Doctor and Laura are discovered at rise of curtain.]

DOCTOR. From what I gathered during my conversation with him the case is
not fully proved to me. In the first place you made a mistake in saying
that he had arrived at these astonishing results about other heavenly
bodies by means of a microscope. Now that I have learned that it was a
spectroscope, he is not only cleared of any suspicion of insanity, but
has rendered a great service to science.

LAURA. Yes, but I never said that.

DOCTOR. Madam, I made careful notes of our conversation, and I remember
that I asked about this very point because I thought I had misunderstood
you. One must be very careful in making such accusations when a
certificate in lunacy is in question.

LAURA. A certificate in lunacy?

DOCTOR. Yes, you must surely know that an insane person loses both civil
and family rights.

LAURA. No, I did not know that.

DOCTOR. There was another matter that seemed to me suspicious. He spoke
of his communications to his booksellers not being answered. Permit me
to ask if you, through motives of mistaken kindness, have intercepted
them?

LAURA. Yes, I have. It was my duty to guard the interests of the family,
and I could not let him ruin us all without some intervention.

DOCTOR. Pardon me, but I think you cannot have considered the
consequences of such an act. If he discovers your secret interference
in his affairs, he will have grounds for suspicions, and they will grow
like an avalanche. And besides, in doing this you have thwarted his will
and irritated him still more. You must have felt yourself how the
mind rebels when one's deepest desires are thwarted and one's will is
crossed.

LAURA. Haven't I felt that!

DOCTOR. Think, then, what he must have gone through.

LAURA [Rising]. It is midnight and he hasn't come home. Now we may fear
the worst.

DOCTOR. But tell me what actually happened this evening after I left. I
must know everything.

LAURA. He raved in the wildest way and had the strangest ideas. For
instance, that he is not the father of his child.

DOCTOR. That is strange. How did such an idea come into his head?

LAURA. I really can't imagine, unless it was because he had to question
one of the men about supporting a child, and when I tried to defend the
girl, he grew excited and said no one could tell who was the father of
a child. God knows I did everything to calm him, but now I believe there
is no help for him. [Cries.]

DOCTOR. But this cannot go on. Something must be done here without, of
course, arousing his suspicions. Tell me, has the Captain ever had such
delusions before?

LAURA. Six years ago things were in the same state, and then he,
himself, confessed in his own letter to the doctor that he feared for
his reason.

DOCTOR. Yes, yes, yes, this is a story that has deep roots and the
sanctity of the family life--and so on--of course I cannot ask about
everything, but must limit myself to appearances. What is done can't
be undone, more's the pity, yet the remedy should be based upon all the
past.--Where do you think he is now?

LAURA. I have no idea, he has such wild streaks.

DOCTOR. Would you like to have me stay until he returns? To avoid
suspicion, I could say that I had come to see your mother who is not
well.

LAURA. Yes, that will do very nicely. Don't leave us, Doctor; if you
only knew how troubled I am! But wouldn't it be better to tell him
outright what you think of his condition.

DOCTOR. We never do that unless the patient mentions the subject
himself, and very seldom even then. It depends entirely on the case. But
we mustn't sit here; perhaps I had better go into the next room; it will
look more natural.

LAURA. Yes, that will be better, and Margret can sit here. She always
waits up when he is out, and she is the only one who has any power over
him. [Goes to the door left] Margret, Margret!

NURSE. Yes, Ma'am. Has the master come home?

LAURA. No; but you are to sit here and wait for him, and when he does
come you are to say my mother is ill and that's why the doctor is here.

NURSE. Yes, yes. I'll see that everything is all right.

LAURA [Opens the door to inner rooms]. Will you come in here, Doctor?

DOCTOR. Thank you.

[Nurse seats herself at the table and takes up a hymn book and
spectacles and reads.]

NURSE. Ah, yes, ah yes!                       [Reads half aloud]
    Ah woe is me, how sad a thing
    Is life within this vale of tears,
  Death's angel triumphs like a king,
    And calls aloud to all the spheres--        Vanity, all is vanity.
    Yes, yes! Yes, yes!
                       [Reads again]
    All that on earth hath life and breath
    To earth must fall before his spear,
    And sorrow, saved alone from death,
    Inscribes above the mighty bier.
        Vanity, all is vanity.
    Yes, Yes.

BERTHA [Comes in with a coffee-pot and some embroidery. She speaks in a
low voice]. Margret, may I sit with you? It is so frightfully lonely up
there.

NURSE. For goodness sake, are you still up, Bertha?

BERTHA. You see I want to finish Father's Christmas present. And here's
something that you'll like.

NURSE. But bless my soul, this won't do. You must be up in the morning,
and it's after midnight now.

BERTHA. What does it matter? I don't dare sit up there alone. I believe
the spirits are at work.

NURSE. You see, just what I've said. Mark my words, this house was not
built on a lucky spot. What did you hear?

BERTHA. Think of it, I heard some one singing up in the attic!

NURSE. In the attic? At this hour?

BERTHA. Yes, it was such it sorrowful, melancholy song! I never heard
anything like it. It sounded as if it came from the store-room, where
the cradle stands, you know, to the left-- -- --

NURSE. Dear me, Dear me! And such a fearful night. It seems as if the
chimneys would blow down. "Ah, what is then this earthly life, But
grief, afliction and great strife? E'en when fairest it has seemed,
Nought but pain it can be deemed." Ah, dear child, may God give us a
good Christmas!

BERTHA. Margret, is it true that Father is ill?

NURSE. Yes, I'm afraid he is.

BERTHA. Then we can't keep Christmas eve? But how can he be up and
around if he is 111?

NURSE. You see, my child, the kind of illness he has doesn't keep him
from being up. Hush, there's some one out in the hall. Go to bed now and
take the coffee pot away or the master will be angry.

BERTHA [Going out with tray]. Good night, Margret.

NURSE. Good night, my child. God bless you.

[Captain comes in, takes off his overcoat.]

CAPTAIN. Are you still up? Go to bed.

NURSE. I was only waiting till-- --

[Captain lights a candle, opens his desk, sits down at it and takes
letters and newspapers out of his pocket.]

NURSE. Mr. Adolf.

CAPTAIN. What do you want?

NURSE. Old mistress is ill and the doctor is here.

CAPTAIN. Is it anything dangerous?

NURSE. No, I don't think so. Just a cold.

CAPTAIN [Gets up]. Margret, who was the father of your child?

NURSE. Oh, I've told you many and many a time; it was that scamp
Johansson.

CAPTAIN. Are you sure that it was he?

NURSE. How childish you are; of course I'm sure when he was the only
one.

CAPTAIN. Yes, but was he sure that he was the only one? No, he could not
be, but you could be sure of it. There is a difference, you see.

NURSE. Well, I can't see any difference.

CAPTAIN. No, you cannot see it, but the difference exists, nevertheless.
[Turns over the pages of a photograph album which is on the table.] Do
you think Bertha looks like me?

NURSE. Of course! Why, you are as like as two peas.

CAPTAIN. Did Johansson confess that he was the father?

NURSE. He was forced to!

CAPTAIN. How terrible! Here is the Doctor. [Doctor comes in.] Good
evening, Doctor. How is my mother-in-law?

DOCTOR. Oh, it's nothing serious; merely a slight sprain of the left
ankle.

CAPTAIN. I thought Margret said it was a cold. There seem to be
different opinions about the same case. Go to bed, Margret.

[Nurse goes. A pause.]

CAPTAIN. Sit down, Doctor.

DOCTOR [Sits]. Thanks.

CAPTAIN. Is it true that you obtain striped foals if you cross a zebra
and a mare?

DOCTOR [Astonished]. Perfectly true.

CAPTAIN. Is it true that the foals continue to be striped if the breed
is continued with a stallion?

DOCTOR. Yes, that is true, too.

CAPTAIN. That is to say, under certain conditions a stallion can be sire
to striped foals or the opposite?

DOCTOR. Yes, so it seems.

CAPTAIN. Therefore an offspring's likeness to the father proves nothing?

DOCTOR. Well-- -- --

CAPTAIN. That is to say, paternity cannot be proven.

DOCTOR. H'm-- --well-- --

CAPTAIN. You are a widower, aren't you, and have had children?

DOCTOR. Ye-es.

CAPTAIN. Didn't you ever feel ridiculous as a. father? I know of nothing
so ludicrous as to see a father leading his children by the hand around
the streets, or to hear it father talk about his children. "My wife's
children," he ought to say. Did you ever feel how false your position
was? Weren't you ever afflicted with doubts, I won't say suspicions,
for, as a gentleman, I assume that your wife was above suspicion.

DOCTOR. No, really, I never was; but, Captain, I believe Goethe says a
man must take his children on good faith.

CAPTAIN. It's risky to take anything on good faith where a woman is
concerned.

DOCTOR. Oh, there are so many kinds of women.

CAPTAIN. Modern investigations have pronounced that there is only one
kind! Lately I have recalled two instances in my life that make me
believe this. When I was young I was strong and, if I may boast,
handsome. Once when I was making a trip on a steamer and sitting with a
few friends in the saloon, the young stewardess came and flung herself
down by me, burst into tears, and told us that her sweetheart was
drowned. We sympathized with her, and I ordered some champagne. After
the second glass I touched her foot; after the fourth her knee, and
before morning I had consoled her.

DOCTOR. That was just a winter fly.

CAPTAIN. Now comes the second instance--and that was a real summer fly.
I was at Lyskil. There was a young married woman stopping there with her
children, but her husband was in town. She was religious, had extremely
strict principles, preached morals to me, and was, I believe, entirely
honorable. I lent her a book, two books, and when she was leaving, she
returned them, strange to say! Three months later, in those very books
I found her card with a declaration on it. It was innocent, as innocent
its it declaration of love can be from a married woman to a strange man
who never made any advances. Now comes the moral: Just don't have too
much faith.

DOCTOR. Don't have too little faith either.

CAPTAIN. No, but just enough. But, you see, Doctor, that woman was so
unconsciously dishonest that she talked to her husband about the
fancy she had taken to me. That's what makes it dangerous, this very
unconsciousness of their instinctive dishonesty. That is a mitigating
circumstance, I admit, but it cannot nullify judgment, only soften it.

DOCTOR. Captain, your thoughts are taking a morbid turn, and you ought
to control them.

CAPTAIN. You must not use the word morbid. Steam boilers, as you know,
explode at it certain pressure, but the same pressure is not needed for
all boiler explosions. You understand? However, you are here to watch
me. If I were not a man I should have the right to make accusations or
complaints, as they are so cleverly called, and perhaps I should be able
to give you the whole diagnosis, and, what is more, the history of my
disease. But unfortunately, I am a man, and there is nothing for me to
do but, like a Roman, fold my arms across my breast and hold my breath
till I die.

DOCTOR. Captain, if you are ill, it will not reflect upon your honor as
a man to tell me all. In fact, I ought to hear the other side.

CAPTAIN. You have had enough in hearing the one, I imagine. Do you
know when I heard Mrs. Alving eulogizing her dead husband, I thought
to myself what a damned pity it was the fellow was dead. Do you suppose
that he would have spoken if he had been alive? And do you suppose
that if any of the dead husbands came back they would be believed? Good
night, Doctor. You see that I am calm, and you can retire without fear.

DOCTOR. Good night, then, Captain. I'm afraid. I can be of no further
use in this case.

CAPTAIN. Are we enemies?

DOCTOR. Far from it. But it is too bad we cannot be friends. Good night.

[Goes. The Captain follows the Doctor to the door at back and then goes
to the door at left and opens it slightly.]

CAPTAIN. Come in, and we'll talk. I heard you out there listening.
[Laura, embarrassed. Captain sits at desk.] It is late, but we must
come to some decision. Sit down. [Pause.] I have been at the post office
tonight to get my letters. From these it appears that you have been
keeping back my mail, both coming and going. The consequence of which
is that the loss of time has its good as destroyed the result I expected
from my work.

LAURA. It was an act of kindness on my part, as you neglected the
service for this other work.

CAPTAIN. It was hardly kindness, for you were quite sure that some day
I should win more honor from that, than from the service; but you were
particularly anxious that I should not win such honors, for fear your
own insignificance would be emphasized by it. In consequence of all this
I have intercepted letters addressed to you.

LAURA. That was a noble act.

CAPTAIN. You see, you have, as you might say, a high opinion of me.
It appears from these letters that, for some time past you have been
arraying my old friends against me by spreading reports about my mental
condition. And you Dave succeeded in your efforts, for now not more than
one person exists from the Colonel down to the cook, who believes that I
am sane. Now these are the facts about my illness; my mind is sound, as
you know, so that I can take care of my duties in the service as well
its my responsibilities as a father; my feelings are more or less under
my control, as my will has not been completely undermined; but you have
gnawed and nibbled at it so that it will soon slip the cogs, and then
the whole mechanism will slip and go to smash. I will not appeal to your
feelings, for you have none; that is your strength; but I will appeal to
your interests.

LAURA. Let me hear.

CAPTAIN. You have succeeded in arousing my suspicions to such an extent
that my judgment is no longer clear, and my thoughts begin to wander.
This is the approaching insanity that you are waiting for, which may
come at any time now. So you are face to face with the question whether
it is more to your interest that I should be sane or insane. Consider.
If I go under I shall lose the service, and where will you be then? If I
die, my life insurance will fall to you. But if I take my own life, you
will get nothing. Consequently, it is to your interest that I should
live out my life.

LAURA. Is this a trap?

CAPTAIN. To be sure. But it rests with you whether you will run around
it or stick your head into it.

LAURA. You say that you will kill yourself! You won't do that!

CAPTAIN. Are you sure? Do you think a man can live when he has nothing
and no one to live for?

LAURA. You surrender, then?

CAPTAIN. No, I offer peace.

LAURA. The conditions?

CAPTAIN. That I may keep my reason. Free me from my suspicions and I
give up the conflict.

LAURA. What suspicions?

CAPTAIN. About Bertha's origin.

LAURA. Are there any doubts about that?

CAPTAIN. Yes, I have doubts, and you have awakened them.

LAURA. I?

CAPTAIN. Yes, you have dropped them like henbane in my ears, and
circumstances have strengthened them. Free me from the uncertainty; tell
me outright that it is true and I will forgive you beforehand.

LAURA. How can I acknowledge a sin that I have not committed?

CAPTAIN. What does it matter when you know that I shall not divulge it?
Do you think a man would go and spread his own shame broadcast?

LAURA. If I say it isn't true, you won't be convinced; but if I say it
is, then you will be convinced. You seem to hope it is true!

CAPTAIN. Yes, strangely enough; it must be, because the first
supposition can't be proved; the latter can be.

LAURA. Have you tiny ground for your suspicions?

CAPTAIN. Yes, and no.

LAURA. I believe you want to prove me guilty, so that you can get rid of
me and then have absolute control over the child. But you won't catch me
in any such snare.

CAPTAIN. Do you think that I would want to be responsible for another
man's child, if I were convinced of your guilt?

LAURA. No, I'm sure you wouldn't, and that's what makes me know you lied
just now when you said that you would forgive me beforehand.

CAPTAIN. [Rises]. Laura, save me and my reason. You don't seem to
understand what I say. If the child is not mine I have no control over
her and don't want to have any, and that is precisely what you do want,
isn't it? But perhaps you want even more--to have power over the child,
but still have me to support you.

LAURA. Power, yes! What has this whole life and death struggle been for
but power?

CAPTAIN. To me it has meant more. I do not believe in a hereafter; the
child was my future life. That was my conception of immortality, and
perhaps the only one that has any analogy in reality. If you take that
away from me, you cut off my life.

LAURA. Why didn't we separate in time?

CAPTAIN. Because the child bound us together; but the link became a
chain. And how did it happen; how? I have never thought about this,
but now memories rise up accusingly, condemningly perhaps. We had been
married two years, and had no children; you know why. I fell ill and lay
at the point of death. During a conscious interval of the fever I heard
voices out in the drawing-room. It was you and the lawyer talking about
the fortune that I still possessed. He explained that you could inherit
nothing because we had no children, and he asked you if you were
expecting to become a mother. I did not hear your reply. I recovered and
we had a child. Who is its father?

LAURA. You.

CAPTAIN. No, I am not. Here is a buried crime that begins to stench, and
what a hellish crime! You women have been compassionate enough to free
the black slaves, but you have kept the white ones. I have worked
and slaved for you, your child, your mother, your servants; I have
sacrificed promotion and career; I have endured torture, flagellation,
sleeplessness, worry for your sake, until my hair has grown gray; and
all that you might enjoy a life without care, and when you grew old,
enjoy life over again in your child. I have borne everything without
complaint, because I thought myself the father of your child. This
is the commonest kind of theft, the most brutal slavery. I have had
seventeen years of penal servitude and have been innocent. What can you
give me in return for that?

LAURA. Now you are quite mad.

CAPTAIN. That is your hope!--And I see how you have labored to conceal
your crime. I sympathized with you because I did not understand your
grief. I have often lulled your evil conscience to rest when I thought I
was driving away morbid thoughts. I have heard you cry out in your sleep
and not wanted to listen. I remember now night before last--Bertha's
birthday--it was between two and three in the morning, and I was sitting
up reading; you shrieked, "Don't, don't!" as if someone were strangling
you; I knocked on the wall--I didn't want to hear any more. I have had
my suspicions for a long time but I did not dare to hear them confirmed.
All this I have suffered for you. What will you do for me?

LAURA. What can I do? I will swear by God and all I hold sacred that you
are Bertha's father.

CAPTAIN. What use is that when you have often said that a mother can and
ought to commit any crime for her child? I implore you as a wounded man
begs for a death blow, to tell me all. Don't you see I'm as helpless as
a child? Don't you hear me complaining as to a mother? Won't you forget
that I am a man, that I am a soldier who can tame men and beasts with a
word? Like a sick man I only ask for compassion. I lay down the tokens
of my power and implore you to have mercy on my life.

[Laura approaches him and lays her hand on his brow.]

LAURA. What! You are crying, man!

CAPTAIN. Yes, I am crying although I am a man. But has not a man eyes!
Has not a man hands, limbs, senses, thoughts, passions? Is he not fed
with the wine food, hurt by the same weapons, warmed and cooled by the
same summer and winter as a woman? If you prick us do we not bleed? If
you tickle us do we not laugh? And if you poison us, do we not die? Why
shouldn't a man complain, a soldier weep? Because it is unmanly? Why is
it unmanly?

LAURA. Weep then, my child, as if you were with your mother once more.
Do you remember when I first came into your life, I was like a second
mother? Your great strong body needed nerves; you were a giant child
that had either come too early into the world, or perhaps was not wanted
at all.

CAPTAIN. Yes, that's how it was. My father's and my mother's will was
against my coming into the world, and consequently I was born without a
will. I thought I was completing myself when you and I became one, and
therefore you were allowed to rule, and I, the commander at the barracks
and before the troops, became obedient to you, grew through you, looked
up to you as to it more highly-gifted being, listened to you as if I had
been your undeveloped child.

LAURA. Yes, that's the way it was, and therefore I loved you as my
child. But you know, you must have seen, when the nature of your
feelings changed and you appeared as my lover that I blushed, and your
embraces were joy that was followed by a remorseful conscience as if my
blood were ashamed. The mother became the mistress. Ugh!

CAPTAIN. I saw it, but I did not understand. I believed you despised me
for my unmanliness, and I wanted to win you as a woman by being a man.

LAURA. Yes, but there was the mistake. The mother was your friend, you
see, but the woman was your enemy, and love between the sexes is strife.
Do not think that I gave myself; I did not give, but I took--what I
wanted. But you had one advantage. I felt that, and I wanted you to feel
it.

CAPTAIN. You always had the advantage. You could hypnotize me when I
was wide awake, so that I neither saw nor heard, but merely obeyed; you
could give me a raw potato and make me imagine it was a peach; you could
force me to admire your foolish caprices as though they were strokes of
genius. You could have influenced me to crime, yes, even to mean, paltry
deeds. Because you lacked intelligence, instead of carrying out my ideas
you acted on your own judgment. But when at last I awoke, I realized
that my honor had been corrupted and I wanted to blot out the memory by
a great deed, an achievement, a discovery, or an honorable suicide. I
wanted to go to war, but was not permitted. It was then that I threw
myself into science. And now when I was about to reach out my hand to
gather in its fruits, you chop off my arm. Now I am dishonored and can
live no longer, for a man cannot live without honor.

LAURA. But a woman?

CAPTAIN. Yes, for she has her children, which he has not. But, like the
rest of mankind, we lived our lives unconscious as children, full of
imagination, ideals, and illusions, and then we awoke; it was all
over. But we awoke with our feet on the pillow, and he who waked us was
himself a sleep-walker. When women grow old and cease to be women, they
get beards on their chins; I wonder what men get when they grow old and
cease to be men. Those who crowed were no longer cocks but capons, and
the pullets answered their call, so that when we thought the sun was
about to rise we found ourselves in the bright moon light amid ruins,
just as in the good old times. It had only been a little morning slumber
with wild dreams, and there was no awakening.

LAURA. Do you know, you should have been a poet!

CAPTAIN. Who knows.

LAURA. Now I am sleepy, so if you have any more fantastic visions keep
them till to-morrow.

CAPTAIN. First, a word more about realities. Do you hate me?

LAURA. Yes, sometimes, when you are a man.

CAPTAIN. This is like race hatred. If it is true that we are descended
from monkeys, at least it must be from two separate species. We are
certainly not like one another, are we?

LAURA. What do you mean to say by all this?

CAPTAIN. I feel that one of us must go under in this struggle.

LAURA. Which?

CAPTAIN. The weaker, of course.

LAURA. And the stronger will be in the right?

CAPTAIN. Always, since he has the power.

LAURA. Then I am in the right.

CAPTAIN. Have you the power already then?

LAURA. Yes, and a legal power with which I shall put you under the
control of a guardian.

CAPTAIN. Under a guardian?

LAURA. And then I shall educate my child without listening to your
fantastic notions.

CAPTAIN. And who will pay for the education when I am no longer here?

LAURA. Your pension will pay for it.

CAPTAIN [Threateningly]. How can you have me put under a guardian?

LAURA [Takes out a letter]. With this letter of which an attested copy
is in the hands of the board of lunacy.

CAPTAIN. What letter?

LAURA [Moving backward toward the door left]. Yours! Your declaration to
the doctor that you are insane. [The Captain stares at her in silence.]
Now you have fulfilled your function as an unfortunately necessary
father and breadwinner, you are not needed any longer and you must go.
You must go, since you have realized that my intellect is as strong as
my will, and since you will not stay and acknowledge it.

[The Captain goes to the table, seizes the lighted lamp and hurls it at
Laura, who disappears backward through the door.]

CURTAIN DROP.




ACT III.

[Same Scene. Another lamp on the table. The private door is barricaded
with a chair.]

LAURA [to Nurse]. Did he give you the keys?

NURSE. Give them to me, no! God help me, but I took them from the
master's clothes that Nöjd had out to brush.

LAURA. Oh, Nöjd is on duty today?

NURSE. Yes, Nöjd.

LAURA. Give me the keys.

NURSE. Yes, but this seems like downright stealing. Do you hear him
walking up there, Ma'am? Back and forth, back and forth.

LAURA. Is the door well barred?

NURSE. Oh, yes, it's barred well enough!

LAURA. Control your feelings, Margret. We must be calm if we are to be
saved. [Knock.] Who is it?

NURSE [Opens door to hall]. It is Nöjd.

LAURA. Let him come in.

NÖJD [Comes in]. A message from the Colonel.

LAURA. Give it to me [Reads] Ah!--Nöjd, have you taken all the
cartridges out of the guns and pouches?

NÖJD. Yes, Ma'am.

LAURA. Good, wait outside while I answer the Colonel's letter. [Nöjd
goes. Laura writes.]

NURSE. Listen. What in the world is he doing up there now?

LAURA. Be quiet while I write.

[The sound of sawing is heard.]

NURSE [Half to herself]. Oh, God have mercy on us all! Where will this
end!

LAURA. Here, give this to Nöjd. And my mother must not know anything
about all this. Do you hear?

[Nurse goes out, Laura opens drawers in desk and takes out papers. The
Pastor comes in, he takes a chair and sits near Laura by the desk.]

PASTOR. Good evening, sister. I have been away all day, as you know, and
only just got back. Terrible things have been happening here.

LAURA. Yes, brother, never have I gone through such a night and such a
day.

PASTOR. I see that you are none the worse for it all.

LAURA. No, God be praised, but think what might have happened!

PASTOR. Tell me one thing, how did it begin? I have heard so many
different versions.

LAURA. It began with his wild idea of not being Bertha's father, and
ended with his throwing the lighted lamp in my face.

PASTOR. But this is dreadful! It is fully developed insanity. And what
is to be done now?

LAURA. We must try to prevent further violence and the doctor has sent
to the hospital for a straightjacket. In the meantime I have sent
a message to the Colonel, and I am now trying to straighten out
the affairs of the household, which he has carried on in a most
reprehensible manner.

PASTOR. This is a deplorable story, but I have always expected something
of the sort. Fire and powder must end in an explosion. What have you got
in the drawer there?

LAURA [Has pulled out a drawer in the desk]. Look, he has hidden
everything here.

PASTOR [Looking into drawer]. Good Heavens, here is your doll and here
is your christening cap and Bertha's rattle; and your letters; and the
locket. [Wipes his eyes.] After all he must have loved you very dearly,
Laura. I never kept such things!

LAURA. I believe he used to love me, but time--time changes so many
things.

PASTOR. What is that big paper? The receipt for a grave! Yes, better the
grave than the lunatic asylum! Laura, tell me, are you blameless in all
this?

LAURA. I? Why should I be to blame because a man goes out of his mind?

PASTOR. Well, well, I shan't say anything. After all, blood is thicker
than water.

LAURA. What do you dare to intimate?

PASTOR [Looking at her penetratingly]. Now, listen!

LAURA. Yes?

PASTOR. You can hardly deny that it suits you pretty well to be able to
educate your child as you wish?

LAURA. I don't understand.

PASTOR. How I admire you!

LAURA. Me? H'm!

PASTOR. And I am to become the guardian of that free-thinker! Do you
know I have always looked on him as a weed in our garden.

[Laura gives a short laugh, and then becomes suddenly serious.]

LAURA. And you dare say that to me--his wife?

PASTOR. You are strong, Laura, incredibly strong. You are like a fox
in a trap, you would rather gnaw off your own leg than let yourself
be caught! Like a master thief--no accomplice, not even your own
conscience. Look at yourself in the glass! You dare not!

LAURA. I never use a looking glass!

PASTOR. No, you dare not! Let me look at your hand. Not a tell-tale
blood stain, not a trace of insidious poison! A little innocent murder
that the law cannot reach, an unconscious crime--unconscious! What a
splendid idea! Do you hear how he is working up there? Take care! If
that man gets loose he will make short work of you.

LAURA. You talk so much, you must have a bad conscience. Accuse me if
you can!

PASTOR. I cannot.

LAURA. You see! You cannot, and therefore I am innocent. You take care
of your ward, and I will take care of mine! Here's the doctor.

[Doctor comes in.]

LAURA [Rising]. Good evening, Doctor. You at least will help me, won't
you? But unfortunately there is not much that can be done. Do you hear
how he is carrying on up there? Are you convinced now?

DOCTOR. I am convinced that an act of violence has been committed, but
the question now is whether that act of violence can be considered an
outbreak of passion or madness.

PASTOR. But apart from the actual outbreak, you must acknowledge that he
has "fixed ideas."

DOCTOR. I think that your ideas, Pastor, are much more fixed.

PASTOR. My settled views about the highest things are--

DOCTOR. We'll leave settled views out of this. Madam, it rests with you
to decide whether your husband is guilty to the extent of imprisonment
and fine or should be put in an asylum! How do you class his behavior?

LAURA. I cannot answer that now.

DOCTOR. That is to say you have no decided opinion as to what will
be most advantageous to the interests of the family? What do you say,
Pastor?

PASTOR. Well, there will be a scandal in either case. It is not easy to
say.

LAURA. But if he is only sentenced to a fine for violence, he will be
able to repeat the violence.

DOCTOR. And if he is sent to prison he will soon be out again. Therefore
we consider it most advantageous for all parties that he should be
immediately treated as insane. Where is the nurse?

LAURA. Why?

DOCTOR. She must put the straightjacket on the patient when I have
talked to him and given the order! But not before. I have--the--garment
out here. [Goes out into the hall rind returns with a large bundle.]
Please ask the nurse to come in here.

[Laura rings.]

PASTOR. Dreadful! Dreadful!

[Nurse comes in.]

DOCTOR [Takes out the straightjacket]. I want you to pay attention to
this. We want you to slip this jacket on the Captain, from behind, you
understand, when I find it necessary to prevent another outbreak of
violence. You notice it has very long sleeves to prevent his moving and
they are to be tied at the back. Here are two straps that go through
buckles which are afterwards fastened to the arm of a chair or the sofa
or whatever is convenient. Will you do it?

NURSE. No, Doctor, I can't do that; I can't.

LAURA. Why don't you do it yourself, Doctor?

DOCTOR. Because the patient distrusts me. You, Madam, would seem to be
the one to do it, but I fear he distrusts even you.

[Laura's face changes for an instant.]

DOCTOR. Perhaps you, Pastor--

PASTOR. No, I must ask to be excused.

[Nöjd comes in.]

LAURA. Have you delivered the message already?

NÖJD. Yes, Madam.

DOCTOR. Oh, is it you, Nöjd? You know the circumstances here; you know
that the Captain is out of his mind and you must help us to take care of
him.

NÖJD. If there is anything I can do for the Captain, you may be sure I
will do it.

DOCTOR. You must put this jacket on him--

NURSE. No, he shan't touch him. Nöjd might hurt him. I would rather do
it myself, very, very gently. But Nöjd can wait outside and help me if
necessary. He can do that.

[There is loud knocking on the private door.]

DOCTOR. There he is! Put the jacket under your shawl on the chair, and
you must all go out for the time being and the Pastor and I will receive
him, for that door will not hold out many minutes. Now go.

NURSE [Going out left.] The Lord help us!

[Laura locks desk, then goes out left. Nöjd goes out back. After a
moment the private door is forced open, with such violence that the
lock is broken and the chair is thrown into the middle of the room. The
Captain comes in with a pile of books under his arm, which he puts on
the table.]

CAPTAIN. The whole thing is to be read here, in every book. So I wasn't
out of my mind after all! Here it is in the Odyssey, book first, verse
215, page 6 of the Upsala translation. It is Telemachus speaking to
Athene. "My mother indeed maintains that he, Odysseus, is my father,
but I myself know it not, for no man yet hath known his own origin."
And this suspicion is harbored by Telemachus about Penelope, the most
virtuous of women! Beautiful, eh? And here we have the prophet Ezekiel:
"The fool saith; behold here is my father, but who can tell whose loins
engendered him." That's quite clear! And what have we here? The History
of Russian Literature by Mersläkow. Alexander Puschkin, Russia's
greatest poet, died of torture front the reports circulated about his
wife's unfaithfulness rather than by the bullet in his breast, from a
duel. On his death-bed he swore she was innocent. Ass, ass! How could he
swear to it? You see, I read my books. Ah, Jonas, art you here? and the
doctor, naturally. Have you heard what I answered when an English lady
complained about Irishmen who used to throw lighted lamps in their
wives' faces? "God, what women," I cried. "Women," she gasped. "Yes, of
course," I answered. "When things go so far that a man, a man who loved
and worshipped a woman, takes a lighted lamp and throws it in her face,
then one may know."

PASTOR. Know what?

CAPTAIN. Nothing. One never knows anything. One only believes. Isn't
that true, Jonas? One believes and then one is saved! Yes, to be sure.
No, I know that one can be damned by his faith. I know that.

DOCTOR. Captain!

CAPTAIN. Silence! I don't want to talk to you; I won't listen to you
repeating their chatter in there, like a telephone! In there! You
know! Look here, Jonas; do you believe that you are the father of
your children? I remember that you had a tutor in your house who had a
handsome face, and the people gossiped about him.

PASTOR. Adolf, take care!

CAPTAIN. Grope under your toupee and feel if there are not two bumps
there. By my soul, I believe he turns pale! Yes, yes, they will talk;
but, good Lord, they talk so much. Still we are a lot of ridiculous
dupes, we married men. Isn't that true, Doctor? How was it with your
marriage bed? Didn't you have a lieutenant in the house, eh? Wait a
moment and I will make a guess--his name was--[whispers in the Doctor's
ear]. You see he turns pale, too! Don't be disturbed. She is dead and
buried and what is done can't be undone. I knew him well, by the way,
and he is now--look at me, Doctor--No, straight in my eyes--a major in
the cavalry! By God, if I don't believe he has horns, too.

DOCTOR [Tortured]. Captain, won't you talk about something else?

CAPTAIN. Do you see? He immediately wants to talk of something else when
I mention horns.

PASTOR. Do you know, Adolf, that you are insane?

CAPTAIN. Yes; I know that well enough. But if I only had the handling of
your illustrious brains for awhile I'd soon have you shut up, too! I am
mad, but how did I become so? That doesn't concern you, and it doesn't
concern anyone. But you want to talk of something else now. [Takes the
photograph album from the table.] Good Lord, that is my child! Mine?
We can never know. Do you know what we would have to do to make sure?
First, one should marry to get the respect of society, then be divorced
soon after and become lovers, and finally adopt the children. Then one
would at least be sure that they were one's adopted children. Isn't that
right? But how can all that help us now? What can keep me now that you
have taken my conception of immortality from me, what use is science
and philosophy to me when I have nothing to live for, what can I do with
life when I am dishonored? I grafted my right arm, half my brain, half
my marrow on another trunk, for I believed they would knit themselves
together and grow into a more perfect tree, and then someone came with
a knife and cut below the graft, and now I am only half a tree. But the
other half goes on growing with my arm and half my brain, while I wither
and die, for they were the best parts I gave away. Now I want to die. Do
with me as you will. I am no more.

[Buries his head on his arms on table. The Doctor whispers to the
Pastor, and they go out through the door left. Soon after Bertha comes
in.]

BERTRA [Goes up to Captain]. Are you ill, Father?

CAPTAIN [Looks up dazed]. I?

BERTHA. Do you know what you have done? Do you know that you threw the
lamp at Mother?

CAPTAIN. Did I?

BERTHA. Yes, you did. Just think if she had been hurt.

CAPTAIN. What would that have mattered?

BERTHA. You are not my father when you talk like that.

CAPTAIN. What do you say? Am I not your father? How do you know that?
Who told you that? And who is your father, then? Who?

BERTHA. Not you at any rate.

CAPTAIN. Still not I? Who, then? Who? You seem to be well informed. Who
told you? That I should live to see my child come and tell me to my
face that I am not her father! But don't you know that you disgrace your
mother when you say that? Don't you know that it is to her shame if it
is so?

BERTHA. Don't say anything bad about Mother; do you hear?

CAPTAIN. No; you hold together, every one of you, against me! and you
have always done so.

BERTHA. Father!

CAPTAIN. Don't use that word again!

BERTHA. Father, father!

CAPTAIN [Draws her to him]. Bertha, dear, dear child, you are my child!
Yes, Yes; it cannot be otherwise. It is so. The other was only sickly
thoughts that come with the wind like pestilence and fever. Look at me
that I may see my soul in your eyes!--But I see her soul, too! You have
two souls and you love me with one and hate me with the other. But you
must only love me! You must have only one soul, or you will never have
peace, nor I either. You must have only one mind, which is the child of
my mind and one will, which is my will.

BERTHA. But I don't want to, I want to be myself.

CAPTAIN. You must not. You see, I am a cannibal, and I want to eat you.
Your mother wanted to eat me, but she was not allowed to. I am Saturn
who ate his children because it had been prophesied that they would eat
him. To eat or be eaten! That is the question. If I do not eat you,
you will eat me, and you have already shown your teeth! But don't be
frightened my dear child; I won't harm you. [Goes and takes a revolver
from the wall.]

BERTHA [Trying to escape]. Help, Mother, help, he wants to kill me.

NURSE [Comes in]. Mr. Adolf, what is it?

CAPTAIN [Examining revolver]. Have you taken out the cartridges?

NURSE. Yes, I put them away when I was tidying up, but sit down and be
quiet and I'll get them out again!

[She takes the Captain by the arm and gets him into a chair, into which
he sinks feebly. Then she takes out the straitjacket and goes behind the
chair. Bertha slips out left.]

NURSE. Mr. Adolf, do you remember when you were my dear little boy and
I tucked you in at night and used to repeat: "God who holds his children
dear" to you, and do you remember how I used to get up in the night and
give you a drink, how I would light the candle and tell you stories when
you had bad dreams and couldn't sleep? Do you remember all that?

CAPTAIN. Go on talking, Margret, it soothes my head so. Tell me some
more.

NURSE. O yes, but you must listen then! Do you remember when you took
the big kitchen knife and wanted to cut out boats with it, and how I
came in and had to get the knife away by fooling you? You were just a
little child who didn't understand, so I had to fool you, for you didn't
know that it was for your own good. "Give me that snake," I said, "or
it will bite you!" and then you let go of the knife. [Takes the revolver
out of the Captain's hand.] And then when you had to be dressed and
didn't want to, I had to coax you and say that you should have a coat
of gold and be dressed like a prince. And then I took your little blouse
that was just made of green wool and held it in front of you and said:
"In with both arms," and then I said, "Now sit nice and still while I
button it down the back," [She puts the straightjacket on] and then I
said, "Get up now, and walk across the floor like a good boy so I can
see how it fits." [She leads him to the sofa.] And then I said, "Now you
must go to bed."

CAPTAIN. What did you say? Was I to go to bed when I was
dressed--damnation! what have you done to me? [Tries to get free.] Ah!
you cunning devil of a woman! Who would have thought you had so much
wit. [Lies down on sofa.] Trapped, shorn, outwitted, and not to be able
to die!

NURSE. Forgive me, Mr. Adolf, forgive me, but I wanted to keep you from
killing your child.

CAPTAIN. Why didn't you let me? You say life is hell and death the
kingdom of heaven, and children belong to heaven.

NURSE. How do you know what comes after death?

CAPTAIN. That is the only thing we do know, but of life we know nothing!
Oh, if one had only known from the beginning.

NURSE. Mr. Adolf, humble your hard heart and cry to God for mercy; it is
not yet too late. It was not too late for the thief on the cross, when
the Saviour said, "Today shalt thou be with me in Paradise."

CAPTAIN. Are you croaking for a corpse already, you old crow?

[Nurse takes a hymnbook out of her pocket.]

CAPTAIN [Calls]. Nöjd, is Nöjd out there?

[Nöjd comes in.]

CAPTAIN. Throw this woman out! She wants to suffocate me with her
hymn-book. Throw her out of the window, or up the chimney, or anywhere.

NÖJD. [Looks at Nurse]. Heaven help you, Captain, but I can't do that, I
can't. If it were only six men, but a woman!

CAPTAIN. Can't you manage one woman, eh?

NÖJD. Of course I can,--but--well, you see, it's queer, but one never
wants to lay hands on a woman.

CAPTAIN. Why not? Haven't they laid hands on me?

NÖJD. Yes, but I can't, Captain. It's just as if you asked me to strike
the Pastor. It's second nature, like religion, I can't!

[Laura comes in, she motions Nöjd to go.]

CAPTAIN. Omphale, Omphale! Now you play with the club while Hercules
spins your wool.

LAURA [Goes to sofa]. Adolf, look at me. Do you believe that I am your
enemy?

CAPTAIN. Yes, I do. I believe that you are all my enemies! My mother was
my enemy when she did not want to bring me into the world because I
was to be born with pain, and she robbed my embryonic life of its
nourishment, and made a weakling of me. My sister was my enemy when she
taught me that I must be submissive to her. The first woman I embraced
was my enemy, for she gave me ten years of illness in return for the
love I gave her. My daughter became my enemy when she had to choose
between me and you. And you, my wife, you have been my arch enemy,
because you never let up on me till I lay here lifeless.

LAURA. I don't know that. I ever thought or even intended what you think
I did. It may be that a dim desire to get rid of you as an obstacle lay
at the bottom of it, and if you see any design in my behavior, it is
possible that it existed, although I was unconscious of it. I have never
thought how it all came about, but it is the result of the course you
yourself laid out, and before God and my conscience I feel that I am
innocent, even if I am not. Your existence has lain like a stone on my
heart--lain so heavily that I tried to shake off the oppressive burden.
This is the truth, and if I have unconsciously struck you down, I ask
your forgiveness.

CAPTAIN. All that sounds plausible. But how does it help me? And whose
fault is it? Perhaps spiritual marriages! Formerly one married a wife,
now, one enters into partnership with a business woman, or goes to
live with a friend--and then one ruins the partner, and dishonors the
friend!--What has become of love, healthy sensuous love? It died in the
transformation. And what is the result of this love in shares, payable
to the bearer without joint liability? Who is the bearer when the crash
comes? Who is the fleshly father of the spiritual child?

LAURA. And as for your suspicions about the child, they are absolutely
groundless.

CAPTAIN. That's just what makes it so horrible. If at least there were
any grounds for them, it would be something to get hold of, to cling to.
Now there are only shadows that hide themselves in the bushes, and stick
out their heads and grin; it is like fighting with the air, or firing
blank cartridges in a sham fight. A fatal reality would have called
forth resistance, stirred life and soul to action; but now my thoughts
dissolve into air, and my brain grinds a void until it is on fire.--Put
a pillow under my head, and throw something over me, I am cold. I am
terribly cold!

[Laura takes her shawl and spreads it over him. Nurse goes to get a
pillow.]

LAURA. Give me your hand, friend.

CAPTAIN. My band! The hand that you have bound! Omphale! Omphale!--But
I feel your shawl against my mouth; it is as warm and soft as your arm,
and it smells of vanilla, like your hair when you were young! Laura,
when you were young, and we walked in the birch woods, with the
primroses and the thrushes--glorious, glorious! Think how beautiful life
was, and what it is now. You didn't want to have it like this, nor did
I, and yet it happened. Who then rules over life?

LAURA. God alone rules--

CAPTAIN. The God of strife then! Or the Goddess perhaps, nowadays.--Take
away the cat that is lying on me! Take it away!

[Nurse brings in a pillow and takes the shawl away.]

CAPTAIN. Give me my army coat!--Throw it over me! [Nurse gets the coat
and puts it over him.] Ah, my rough lion skin that, you wanted to take
away from me! Omphale! Omphale! You cunning woman, champion of peace and
contriver of man's disarmament. Wake, Hercules, before they take your
club away from you! You would wile our armor from us too, and make
believe that it is nothing but glittering finery. No, it was iron, let
me tell you, before it ever glittered. In olden days the smith made the
armor, now it is the needle woman. Omphale! Omphale! Rude strength
has fallen before treacherous weakness. Out on you infernal woman, and
damnation on your sex! [He raises himself to spit but falls back on the
sofa.] What have you given me for a pillow, Margret? It is so hard, and
so cold, so cold. Come and sit near me. There. May I put my head on your
knee? So!--This is warm! Bend over me so that I can feel your breast!
Oh, it is sweet to sleep against a woman's breast, a mother's, or a
mistress's, but the mother's is sweetest.

LAURA. Would you like to see your child, Adolf?

CAPTAIN. My child? A man has no children, it is only woman who has
children, and therefore the future is hers when we die childless. Oh,
God, who holds his children dear!

NURSE. Listen, he is praying to God.

CAPTAIN. No, to you to put me to sleep, for I am tired, so tired. Good
night, Margret, and blessed be you among women.

[He raises himself, but falls with a cry on the nurses's lap. Laura goes
to left and calls the Doctor who comes in with the Pastor.]

LAURA. Help us, Doctor, if it isn't too late. Look, he has stopped
breathing.

DOCTOR [Feels the Captain's pulse.] It is a stroke.

PASTOR. Is he dead?

DOCTOR. No, he may yet cone back to life, but to what an awakening we
cannot tell.

PASTOR. "First death, and then the judgment."

DOCTOR. No judgment, and no accusations, you who believe that a God
shapes man's destiny must go to him about this.

NURSE. Ah, Pastor, with his last breath he prayed to God.

PASTOR [To Laura]. Is that true?

LAURA. It is.

DOCTOR. In that case, which I can understand as little as the cause of
his illness, my skill is at an end. You try yours now, Pastor.

LAURA. Is that all you have to say at this death-bed, Doctor?

DOCTOR. That is all! I know no more. Let him speak who knows more.

[Bertha comes in from left and runs to her mother.]

BERTHA. Mother, Mother!

LAURA. My child, my own child!

PASTOR. Amen.

CURTAIN.

*****





COUNTESS JULIE


CHARACTERS

     COUNTESS JULIE, twenty-five years old
     JEAN, a valet, thirty
     KRISTIN, a cook, thirty-five
     FARM SERVANTS

The action takes place on Saint John's night, the mid-summer festival
surviving from pagan times.


[SCENE.--A large kitchen. The ceiling and walls are partially covered
by draperies and greens. The back wall slants upward from left side of
scene. On back wall, left, are two shelves filled with copper kettles,
iron casseroles and tin pans. The shelves are trimmed with fancy
scalloped paper. To right of middle a large arched entrance with glass
doors through which one sees a fountain with a statue of Cupid, syringa
bushes in bloom and tall poplars. To left corner of scene a large stove
with hood decorated with birch branches. To right, servants' dining
table of white pine and a few chairs. On the end of table stands a
Japanese jar filled with syringa blossoms. The floor is strewn with
juniper branches.]

[Near stove, an ice-box, sink and dish-table. A large old-fashioned
bell, hangs over the door, to left of door a speaking tube.]

[Kristin stands at stove engaged in cooking something. She wears a light
cotton dress and kitchen apron. Jean comes in wearing livery; he carries
a large pair of riding-boots with spurs, which he puts on floor.]

JEAN. Tonight Miss Julie is crazy again, perfectly crazy.

KRISTIN. So--you're back at last.

JEAN. I went to the station with the Count and coming back I went in to
the barn and danced and then I discovered Miss Julie there leading the
dance with the gamekeeper. When she spied me, she rushed right toward me
and asked me to waltz, and then she waltzed so--never in my life have I
seen anything like it! Ah--she is crazy tonight.

KRISTIN. She has always been. But never so much as in the last
fortnight, since her engagement was broken off.

JEAN. Yes, what about that gossip? He seemed like a fine fellow although
he wasn't rich! Ach! they have so much nonsense about them. [Seats
himself at table.] It's queer about Miss Julie though--to prefer staying
here at home among these people, eh, to going away with her father to
visit her relatives, eh?

KRISTIN. She's probably shamefaced about breaking off with her intended.

JEAN. No doubt! but he was a likely sort just the same. Do you know,
Kristin, how it happened? I saw it, although I didn't let on.

KRISTIN. No--did you see it?

JEAN. Yes, indeed, I did. They were out in the stable yard one evening
and she was "training" him as she called it. Do you know what happened?
She made him leap over her riding whip, the way you teach a dog to
jump. He jumped it twice and got a lash each time; but the third time
he snatched the whip from her hand and broke it into pieces. And then he
vanished!

KRISTIN. Was that the way it happened? No, you don't say so!

JEAN. Yes, that's the way the thing happened. But what have you got to
give me that's good, Kristin?

KRISTIN. [She takes things from the pans on stove and serves them to
him.] Oh, it's only a bit of kidney that I cut out of the veal steak for
you.

JEAN [Smelling the food]. Splendid! My favorite delicacy. [Feeling of
plate]. But you might have warmed the plate.

KRISTIN. You're fussier than the Count, when you get started. [Tweaks
his hair.]

JEAN. Don't pull my hair! You know how sensitive I am.

KRISTIN. Oh--there, there! you know I was only loving you.

[Jean eats, and Kristin opens bottle of beer.]

JEAN. Beer on midsummer night--thank you, no! I have something better
than that myself. [Takes bottle of wine from drawer of table.] Yellow
seal, how's that? Now give me a glass--a wine glass you understand, of
course, when one drinks the genuine.

KRISTIN. [Fetches a glass. Then goes to stove and puts on casserole.]
Heaven help the woman who gets you for her husband. Such a fuss budget!

JEAN. Oh, talk! You ought to be glad to get such a fine fellow as I am.
And I don't think it's done you any harm because I'm considered your
intended. [Tastes wine.] Excellent, very excellent! Just a little too
cold. [Warms glass with hands]. We bought this at Dijon. It stood at
four francs a litre in the bulk; then of course there was the duty
besides. What are you cooking now that smells so infernally?

KRISTIN. Oh, it's some devil's mess that Miss Julie must have for Diana.

JEAN. Take care of your words, Kristin. But why should you stand there
cooking for that damned dog on a holiday evening? Is it sick, eh?

KRISTIN. Yes, it's sick. Diana sneaked out with the gatekeeper's
mongrels and now something is wrong. Miss Julie can't stand that.

JEAN. Miss Julie has a great deal of pride about some things--but not
enough about others! Just like her mother in her lifetime; she
thrived best in the kitchen or the stable, but she must always drive
tandem--never one horse! She would go about with soiled cuffs but she
had to have the Count's crest on her cuff buttons. And as for Miss
Julie, she doesn't take much care of her appearance either. I should say
she isn't refined. Why just now out there she pulled the forester from
Anna's side and asked him to dance with her. We wouldn't do things that
way. But when the highborn wish to unbend they become vulgar. Splendid
she is though! Magnificent! Ah, such shoulders and--

KRISTIN. Oh, don't exaggerate. I've heard what Clara says who dresses
her sometimes, I have.

JEAN. Ha! Clara--you women are always jealous of each other. I who've
been out riding with her--!!! And such a dancer!

KRISTIN. Come now, Jean, don't you want to dance with me when I'm
through?

JEAN. Of course I want to.

KRISTIN. That is a promise?

JEAN. Promise! When I say I will do a thing I do it! Thanks for the
supper--it was excellent.

[Pushes cork in the bottle with a bang. Miss Julie appears in doorway,
speaking to someone outside.]

JULIE. I'll be back soon, but don't let things wait for me.

[Jean quickly puts bottle in table drawer and rises very respectfully.]

[Enter Miss Julie and goes to Kristin.]

JULIE. Is it done?

[Kristin indicating Jean's presence.]

JEAN [Gallantly]. Have you secrets between you?

JULIE. [Flipping handkerchief in his face]. Curious, are you?

JEAN. How sweet that violet perfume is!

JULIE [Coquettishly]. Impudence! Do you appreciate perfumes too?
Dance--that you can do splendidly. [Jean looks towards the cooking
stove]. Don't look. Away with you.

JEAN [Inquisitive but polite]. Is it some troll's dish that you are both
concocting for midsummer night? Something to pierce the future with and
evoke the face of your intended?

JULIE [Sharply]. To see him one must have sharp eyes. [To Kristin].
Put it into a bottle and cork it tight. Come now, Jean and dance a
schottische with me.

[Jean hesitates.]

JEAN. I don't wish to be impolite to anyone but--this dance I promised
to Kristin.

JULIE. Oh, she can have another--isn't that so, Kristin? Won't you lend
Jean to me.

KRISTIN. It's not for me to say, if Miss Julie is so gracious it's not
for me to say no. [To Jean]. Go you and be grateful for the honor.

JEAN. Well said--but not wishing any offense I wonder if it is prudent
for Miss Julie to dance twice in succession with her servant, especially
as people are never slow to find meaning in--

JULIE [Breaking out]. In what? What sort of meaning? What were you going
to say?

JEAN [Taken aback]. Since Miss Julie does not understand I must speak
plainly. It may look strange to prefer one of your--underlings--to
others who covet the same honor--

JULIE. To prefer--what a thought! I, the lady of the house! I honor the
people with my presence and now that I feel like dancing I want to have
a partner who knows how to lead to avoid being ridiculous.

JEAN. As Miss Julie commands. I'm here to serve.

JULIE [Mildly]. You mustn't look upon that as a command. Tonight we are
all in holiday spirits--full of gladness and rank is flung aside. So,
give me your arm! Don't be alarmed, Kristin, I shall not take your
sweetheart away from you.

[Jean offers arm. They exit.]

[PANTOMIME.--Played as though the actress were really alone. Turns
her back to the audience when necessary. Does not look out into the
auditorium. Does not hurry as though fearing the audience might grow
restless. Soft violin music from the distance, schottische time. Kristin
hums with the music. She cleans the table; washes plate, wipes it and
puts it in the china closet. Takes off her apron and then opens drawer
of table and takes a small hand glass and strands it against a flower
pot on table. Lights a candle and heats a hair pin with which she crimps
her hair around her forehead. After that she goes to door at back and
listens. Then she returns to table and sees the Countess' handkerchief,
picks it up, smells of it, then smooths it out and folds it. Enter
Jean.]

JEAN. She is crazy I tell you! To dance like that! And the people stand
grinning at her behind the doors. What do you say to that, Kristin?

KRISTIN. Oh, didn't I say she's been acting queer lately? But isn't it
my turn to dance now?

JEAN. You are not angry because I let myself be led by the forelock?

KRISTIN. No, not for such a little thing. That you know well enough. And
I know my place too--

JEAN [Puts arm around her waist]. You're a pretty smart girl, Kristin,
and you ought to make a good wife.

[Enter Miss Julie.]

JULIE [Disagreeably surprised, but with forced gaiety]. You're a
charming cavalier to run away from your partner.

JEAN. On the contrary, Miss Julie, I have hastened to my neglected one
as you see.

JULIE [Changing subject]. Do you know, you dance wonderfully well! But
why are you in livery on a holiday night? Take it off immediately.

JEAN. Will you excuse me--my coat hangs there. [Goes R. and takes coat.]

JULIE. Does it embarrass you to change your coat in my presence? Go to
your room then--or else stay and I'll turn my back.

JEAN. With your permission, Miss Julie.

[Exit Jean R. One sees his arm as he changes coat.]

JULIE [To Kristin]. Is Jean your sweetheart, that he is so devoted?

KRISTIN. Sweetheart? Yes, may it please you. Sweetheart--that's what
they call it.

JULIE. Call it?

KRISTIN. Oh Miss Julie has herself had a sweetheart and--

JULIE. Yes, we were engaged--

KRISTIN. But it came to nothing.

[Enter Jean in black frock coat.]

JULIE. Tres gentil, Monsieur Jean, tres gentil.

JEAN. Vous voulez plaisanter, Mademoiselle.

JULIE. Et vous voulez parler francais? Where did you learn that?

JEAN. In Switzerland where I was butler in the largest hotel at Lucerne.

JULIE. Why, you look like a gentleman in your frock coat. Charmant!
[Seats herself by table.]

JEAN. You flatter me!

JULIE. Flatter! [Picking him up on the word.]

JEAN. My natural modesty forbids me to believe that you could mean
these pleasant things that you say to a--such as I am--and therefore I
allowed myself to fancy that you overrate or, as it is called, flatter.

JULIE. Where did you learn to use words like that? Have you frequented
the theatres much?

JEAN. I have frequented many places, I have!

JULIE. But you were born here in this neighborhood?

JEAN. My father was a deputy under the public prosecutor, and I saw Miss
Julie as a child--although she didn't see me!

JULIE. No, really?

JEAN. Yes, I remember one time in particular. But I mustn't talk about
that.

JULIE. Oh yes, do, when was it?

JEAN. No really--not now, another time perhaps.

JULIE. "Another time" is a good for nothing. Is it so dreadful then?

JEAN. Not dreadful--but it goes against the grain. [Turns and points to
Kristin, who has fallen asleep in a chair near stove]. Look at her.

JULIE. She'll make a charming wife! Does she snore too?

JEAN. No, but she talks in her sleep.

JULIE [Cynically]. How do you know that she talks in her sleep?

JEAN [Boldly]. I have heard her.[Pause and they look at each other.]

JULIE. Why don't you sit down?

JEAN. I can't allow myself to do so in your presence.

JULIE. But if I command you?

JEAN. Then I obey.

JULIE. Sit down then. But wait--can't you get me something to drink
first?

JEAN. I don't know what there is in the icebox. Nothing but beer,
probably.

JULIE. Is beer nothing? My taste is so simple that I prefer it to wine.

[Jean takes out beer and serves it on plate.]

JEAN. Allow me.

JULIE. Won't you drink too?

JEAN. I am no friend to beer--but if Miss Julie commands.

JULIE [Gaily]. Commands! I should think as a polite cavalier you might
join your lady.

JEAN. Looking at it in that way you are quite right. [Opens another
bottle of beer and fills glass.]

JULIE. Give me a toast!

[Jean hesitates.]

JULIE [Mockingly]. Old as he is, I believe the man is bashful!

JEAN [On his knee with mock gallantry, raises glass]. A health to my
lady of the house!

JULIE. Bravo! Now you must kiss my slipper. Then the thing is perfect.

[Jean hesitates and then seizes her foot and kisses it lightly.]

JULIE. Splendid! You should have been an actor.

JEAN [Rising]. But this mustn't go any further, Miss Julie. What if
someone should come in and see us?

JULIE. What harm would that do?

JEAN. Simply that it would give them a chance to gossip. And if Miss
Julie only knew how their tongues wagged just now--then--

JULIE. What did they say? Tell me. And sit down now.

JEAN [Sitting]. I don't wish to hurt you, but they used an
expression--threw hints of a certain kind--but you are not a child,
you can understand. When one sees a lady drinking alone with a man--let
alone a servant--at night--then--

JULIE. Then what? And for that matter, we are not alone. Kristin is
here.

JEAN. Sleeping! Yes.

JULIE. Then I shall wake her. [Rises]. Kristin, are you asleep?

KRISTIN. [In her sleep]. Bla--bla--bla--bla.

JULIE. Kristin! She certainly can sleep. [Goes to Kristin.]

KRISTIN. [In her sleep]. The Count's boots are polished--put on the
coffee--soon--soon--soon. Oh--h-h-h--puh! [Breathes heavily. Julie takes
her by the nose.]

JULIE. Won't you wake up?

JEAN [Sternly]. Don't disturb the sleeping.

JULIE [Sharply]. What?

JEAN. Anyone who has stood over the hot stove all day long is tired when
night comes. One should respect the weary.

JULIE. That's a kind thought--and I honor it. [Offers her hand.] Thanks
for the suggestion. Come out with me now and pick some syringas.

[Kristin has awakened and goes to her room, right, in a sort of sleep
stupified way.]

JEAN. With Miss Julie?

JULIE. With me.

JEAN. But that wouldn't do--decidedly not.

JULIE. I don't understand you. Is it possible that you fancy that I--

JEAN. No--not I, but people.

JULIE. What? That I'm in love with my coachman?

JEAN. I am not presumptuous, but we have seen instances--and with the
people nothing is sacred.

JULIE. I believe he is an aristocrat!

JEAN. Yes, I am.

JULIE. But I step down-- --

JEAN. Don't step down, Miss Julie. Listen to me--no one would believe
that you stepped down of your own accord; people always say that one
falls down.

JULIE. I think better of the people than you do. Come--and try
them--come!

[Dares him with a look.]

JEAN. Do you know that you are wonderful?

JULIE. Perhaps. But you are too. Everything is wonderful for that
matter. Life, people--everything. Everything is wreckage, that drifts
over the water until it sinks, sinks. I have the same dream every now
and then and at this moment I am reminded of it. I find myself seated at
the top of a high pillar and I see no possible way to get down. I grow
dizzy when I look down, but down I must. But I'm not brave enough to
throw myself; I cannot hold fast and I long to fall--but I don't fall.
And yet I can find no rest or peace until I shall come down to earth;
and if I came down to earth I would wish myself down in the ground. Have
you ever felt like that?

JEAN. No, I dream that I'm lying in a dark wood under a tall tree and I
would up--up to the top, where I can look far over the fair landscape,
where the sun is shining. I climb--climb, to plunder the birds' nests
up there where the golden eggs lie, but the tree trunk is so thick, so
smooth, and the first limb is so high! But I know if I reached the first
limb I should climb as though on a ladder, to the top. I haven't reached
it yet, but I shall reach it, if only in the dream.

JULIE. Here I stand talking about dreams with you. Come now, just out in
the park.

[She offers her arm and they start.]

JEAN. We should sleep on nine midsummer flowers tonight and then our
dreams would come true.

[She turns, Jean quickly holds a hand over his eye.]

JULIE. What is it, something in your eye?

JEAN. Oh, it is nothing--just a speck. It will be all right in a moment.

JULIE. It was some dust from my sleeve that brushed against you. Now
sit down and let me look for it. [Pulls him into a chair, looks into his
eye.] Now sit still, perfectly still. [Uses corner of her handkerchief
in his eye. Strikes his hand.] So--will you mind? I believe you are
trembling, strong man that you are. [Touching his arm.] And such arms!

JEAN [Warningly.] Miss Julie!

JULIE. Yes, Monsieur Jean!

JEAN. Attention. Je ne suis qu'un homme!

JULIE. Will you sit still! So, now it is gone! Kiss my hand and thank
me!

[Jean rises.]

JEAN. Miss Julie, listen to me. Kristin has gone to bed now--will you
listen to me--

JULIE. Kiss my hand first.

JEAN. Listen to me--

JULIE. Kiss my hand first.

JEAN. Yes, but blame yourself.

JULIE. For what?

JEAN. For what? Are you a child at twenty-five? Don't you know that it
is dangerous to play with fire?

JULIE. Not for me. I am insured!

JEAN. No, you are not. But even if you are, there is inflammable
material in the neighborhood.

JULIE. Might that be you?

JEAN. Yes, not because it is I, but because I'm a young man--

JULIE [Scornfully]. With a grand opportunity--what inconceivable
presumption! A Don Juan perhaps! Or a Joseph! On my soul, I believe he
is a Joseph!

JEAN. You do?

JULIE. Almost.

[Jean rushes towards her and tries to take her in his arms to kiss her.]

JULIE [Gives him a box on the ear]. Shame on you.

JEAN. Are you in earnest, or fooling?

JULIE. In earnest.

JEAN. Then you were in earnest a moment ago, too. You play too seriously
with what is dangerous. Now I'm tired of playing and beg to be excused
that I may go on with my work. The Count must have his boots in time,
and it is long past midnight. [Jean picks up boots.]

JULIE. Put those boots away.

JEAN. No, that is my work which it is my duty to do, but I was not hired
to be your play thing and that I shall never be. I think too well of
myself for that.

JULIE. You are proud.

JEAN. In some things--not in others.

JULIE. Were you ever in love?

JEAN. We do not use that word, but I have liked many girls. One time I
was sick because I couldn't have the one I wanted--sick, you understand,
like the princesses in the Arabian Nights who could not eat nor drink
for love sickness.

JULIE. Who was she? [Jean is silent.] Who was she?

JEAN. That you could not make me tell.

JULIE. Not if I ask you as an equal, as a--friend? Who was she?

JEAN. It was you!

[Julie seats herself.]

JULIE. How extravagant!

JEAN. Yes, if you will, it was ridiculous. That was the story I
hesitated to tell, but now I'm going to tell it. Do you know how people
in high life look from the under world? No, of course you don't. They
look like hawks and eagles whose backs one seldom sees, for they soar up
above. I lived in a hovel provided by the state, with seven brothers and
sisters and a pig; out on a barren stretch where nothing grew, not even
a tree, but from the window I could see the Count's park walls with
apple trees rising above them. That was the garden of paradise; and
there stood many angry angels with flaming swords protecting it; but
for all that I and other boys found the way to the tree of life--now you
despise me.

JULIE. Oh, all boys steal apples.

JEAN. You say that, but you despise me all the same. No matter! One time
I entered the garden of paradise--it was to weed the onion beds with my
mother! Near the orchard stood a Turkish pavilion, shaded and overgrown
with jessamine and honeysuckle. I didn't know what it was used for and
I had never seen anything so beautiful. People passed in and out and one
day--the door was left open. I sneaked in and beheld walls covered with
pictures of kings and emperors and there were red-fringed curtains at
the windows--now you understand what I mean--I--[Breaks off a spray of
syringes and puts it to her nostrils.] I had never been in the castle
and how my thoughts leaped--and there they returned ever after. Little
by little the longing came over me to experience for once the pleasure
of--enfin, I sneaked in and was bewildered. But then I heard someone
coming--there was only one exit for the great folk, but for me there was
another, and I had to choose that. [Julie who has taken the syringa
lets it fall on table.] Once out I started to run, scrambled through a
raspberry hedge, rushed over a strawberry bed and came to a stop on
the rose terrace. For there I saw a figure in a white dress and white
slippers and stockings--it was you! I hid under a heap of weeds, under,
you understand, where the thistles pricked me, and lay on the damp, rank
earth. I gazed at you walking among the roses. And I thought if it is
true that the thief on the cross could enter heaven and dwell among the
angels it was strange that a pauper child on God's earth could not go
into the castle park and play with the Countess' daughter.

JULIE [Pensively]. Do you believe that all poor children would have such
thoughts under those conditions?

JEAN [Hesitates, then in a positive voice]. That all poor children--yes,
of course, of course!

JULIE. It must be a terrible misfortune to be poor.

JEAN [With deep pain and great chagrin]. Oh, Miss Julie, a dog may lie
on the couch of a Countess, a horse may be caressed by a lady's hand,
but a servant--yes, yes, sometimes there is stuff enough in a man,
whatever he be, to swing himself up in the world, but how often does
that happen! But to return to the story, do you know what I did? I ran
down to the mill dam and threw myself in with my clothes on--and was
pulled out and got a thrashing. But the following Sunday when all the
family went to visit my grandmother I contrived to stay at home; I
scrubbed myself well, put on my best clothes, such as they were, and
went to church so that I might see you. I saw you. Then I went home
with my mind made up to put an end to myself. But I wanted to do
it beautifully and without pain. Then I happened to remember that
elderberry blossoms are poisonous. I knew where there was a big
elderberry bush in full bloom and I stripped it of its riches and made
a bed of it in the oat-bin. Have you ever noticed how smooth and glossy
oats are? As soft as a woman's arm.--Well, I got in and let down the
cover, fell asleep, and when I awoke I was very ill, but didn't die--as
you see. What I wanted--I don't know. You were unattainable, but through
the vision of you I was made to realize how hopeless it was to rise
above the conditions of my birth.

JULIE. You tell it well! Were you ever at school?

JEAN. A little, but I have read a good deal and gone to the theatres.
And besides, I have always heard the talk of fine folks and from them I
have learned most.

JULIE. Do you listen then to what we are saying?

JEAN. Yes, indeed, I do. And I have heard much when I've been on the
coachbox. One time I heard Miss Julie and a lady--

JULIE. Oh, what was it you heard?

JEAN. Hm! that's not so easy to tell. But I was astonished and could
not understand where you had heard such things. Well, perhaps at bottom
there's not so much difference between people and--people.

JULIE. Oh, shame! We don't behave as you do when we are engaged.

JEAN. [Eyeing her]. Are you sure of that? It isn't worthwhile to play
the innocent with me.

JULIE. I gave my love to a rascal.

JEAN. That's what they always say afterward.

JULIE. Always?

JEAN. Always, I believe, as I have heard the expression many times
before under the same circumstances.

JULIE. What circumstances?

JEAN. Those we've been talking about. The last time I-- --

JULIE. Silence. I don't wish to hear any more.

JEAN. Well, then I beg to be excused so I may go to bed.

JULIE. Go to bed! On midsummer night?

JEAN. Yes, for dancing out there with that pack has not amused me.

JULIE. Then get the key for the boat and row me out over the lake. I
want to see the sun rise.

JEAN. Is that prudent?

JULIE. One would think that you were afraid of your reputation.

JEAN. Why not? I don't want to be made ridiculous. I am not willing to
be driven out without references, now that I am going to settle down.
And I feel I owe something to Kristin.

JULIE. Oh, so it's Kristin now--

JEAN. Yes, but you too. Take my advice, go up and go to bed.

JULIE. Shall I obey you?

JEAN. For once--for your own sake. I beg of you. Night is crawling
along, sleepiness makes one irresponsible and the brain grows hot. Go to
your room. In fact--if I hear rightly some of the people are coming for
me. If they find us here--then you are lost.

[Chorus is heard approaching, singing.]

      "There came two ladies out of the woods
       Tridiridi-ralla tridiridi-ra.
       One of them had wet her foot,
       Tridiridi-ralla-la.

      "They talked of a hundred dollars,
       Tridiridi-ralla tridiridi-ra.
       But neither had hardly a dollar,
       Tridiridi-ralla-la.

      "The mitten I'm going to send you,
       Tridirichi-ralla tridiridi-ra.
       For another I'm going to jilt you,
       Tridiridi-ralla tridiridi-ra."

JULIE. I know the people and I love them and they respect me. Let them
come, you shall see.

JEAN. No, Miss Julie, they don't love you. They take your food and spit
upon your kindness, believe me. Listen to them, listen to what they're
singing! No! Don't listen!

JULIE [Listening]. What are they singing?

JEAN. It's something suggestive, about you and me.

JULIE. Infamous! Oh horrible! And how cowardly!

JEAN. The pack is always cowardly. And in such a battle one can only run
away.

JULIE. Run away? Where? We can't get out and we can't go to Kristin.

JEAN. Into my room then. Necessity knows no law. You can depend on me
for I am your real, genuine, respectful friend.

JULIE. But think if they found you there.

JEAN. I will turn the key and if they try to break in I'll shoot.
Come--come!

JULIE. [Meaningly]. You promise me--?

JEAN. I swear...

[She exits R. Jean follows her.]

[BALLET.--The farm folk enter in holiday dress with flowers in their
hats, a fiddler in the lead. They carry a keg of home-brewed beer and a
smaller keg of gin, both decorated with greens which are placed on the
table. They help themselves to glasses and drink. Then they sing and
dance a country dance to the melody of "There came two ladies out of the
woods." When that is over they go out, singing.]

[Enter Julie alone, sees the havoc the visitors have made, clasps her
hands, takes out powder box and powders her face. Enter Jean exuberant.]

JEAN. There, you see, and you heard them. Do you think it's possible for
us to remain here any longer?

JULIE. No, I don't. But what's to be done?

JEAN. Fly! Travel--far from here!

JULIE. Travel--yes--but where?

JEAN. To Switzerland--to the Italian lakes. You have never been there?

JULIE. No--is it beautiful there?

JEAN. Oh, an eternal summer! Oranges, trees, laurels--oh!

JULIE. But what shall we do there?

JEAN. I'll open a first-class hotel for first-class patrons.

JULIE. Hotel?

JEAN. That is life--you shall see! New faces constantly, different
languages. Not a moment for boredom. Always something to do night and
day--the bell ringing, the trains whistling, the omnibus coming and
going and all the time the gold pieces rolling into the till--that is
life!

JULIE. Yes, that is life. And I--?

JEAN. The mistress of the establishment--the ornament of the house. With
your looks--and your manners--oh, it's a sure success! Colossal! You
could sit like a queen in the office and set the slaves in action by
touching an electric button. The guests line up before your throne
and shyly lay their riches on your desk. You can't believe how people
tremble when they get their bills--I can salt the bills and you can
sweeten them with your most bewitching smile--ha, let us get away from
here--[Takes a time table from his pocket] immediately--by the next
train. We can be at Malmö at 6.30, Hamburg at 8.40 tomorrow morning,
Frankfort the day after and at Como by the St. Gothard route in
about--let me see, three days. Three days!

JULIE. All that is well enough, but Jean--you must give me courage. Take
me in your arms and tell me that you love me.

JEAN [Hesitatingly]. I will--but I daren't--not again in this house. I
love you of course--do you doubt that?

JULIE [Shyly and with womanliness]. You! Say thou to me! Between us
there can be no more formality. Say thou.

JEAN. I can't--There must be formality between us--as long as we are
in this house. There is the memory of the past--and there is the
Count, your father. I have never known anyone else for whom I have such
respect. I need only to see his gloves lying in a chair to feel my own
insignificance. I have only to hear his bell to start like a nervous
horse--and now as I see his boots standing there so stiff and proper I
feel like bowing and scraping. [Gives boots a kick]. Superstitions and
prejudices taught in childhood can't be uprooted in a moment. Let us go
to a country that is a republic where they'll stand on their heads for
my coachman's livery--on their heads shall they stand--but I shall not.
I am not born to bow and scrape, for there's stuff in me--character.
If I only get hold of the first limb, you shall see me climb. I'm a
coachman today, but next year I shall be a proprietor, in two years a
gentleman of income; then for Roumania where I'll let them decorate me
and can, mark you, _can_ end a count!

JULIE. Beautiful, beautiful!

JEAN. Oh, in Roumania, one can buy a title cheap--and so you can be a
countess just the same--my countess!

JULIE. What do I care for all that--which I now cast behind me. Say that
you love me--else, what am I, without it?

JEAN. I'll say it a thousand times afterwards, but not here. Above all,
let us have no sentimentality now or everything will fall through. We
must look at this matter coldly like sensible people. [Takes out a cigar
and lights it.] Now sit down there and I'll sit here and we'll talk it
over as if nothing had happened.

JULIE [Staggered]. Oh, my God, have you no feeling?

JEAN. I? No one living has more feeling than I but I can restrain
myself.

JULIE. A moment ago you could kiss my slipper and now--

JEAN [Harshly]. That was--then. Now we have other things to think about.

JULIE. Don't speak harshly to me.

JEAN. Not harshly, but wisely. One folly has been committed--commit no
more. The Count may be here at any moment, and before he comes, our
fate must be settled. How do my plans for the future strike you? Do you
approve of them?

JULIE. They seem acceptable enough. But one question. For such a great
undertaking a large capital is necessary, have you that?

JEAN [Chewing his cigar]. I? To be sure. I have my regular occupation,
my unusual experience, my knowledge of different languages--that is
capital that counts, I should say.

JULIE. But with all that you could not buy a railway ticket.

JEAN. That's true, and for that reason I'm looking for a backer who can
furnish the funds.

JULIE. How can that be done at a moment's notice?

JEAN. That is for you to say, if you wish to be my companion.

JULIE. I can't--as I have nothing myself.

[A pause.]

JEAN. Then the whole matter drops-- --

JULIE. And-- --

JEAN. Things remain as they are.

JULIE. Do you think I could remain under this roof after----Do you think
I will allow the people to point at me in scorn, or that I can ever look
my father in the face again? Never! Take me away from this humiliation
and dishonor. Oh, what have I done! Oh, my God, what have I done!
[Weeping.]

JEAN. So, you are beginning in that tune now. What have you done? The
same as many before you.

JULIE. And now you despise me. I am falling! I am falling!

JEAN. Fall down to my level, I'll lift you up afterwards.

JULIE. What strange power drew me to you--the weak to the strong--the
falling to the rising, or is this love! This--love! Do you know what
love is?

JEAN. I? Yes! Do you think it's the first time?

JULIE. What language, what thoughts.

JEAN. I am what life has made me. Don't be nervous and play the high and
mighty, for now we are on the same level. Look here, my little girl, let
me offer you a glass of something extra fine. [Opens drawer of table
and takes out wine bottle, then fills two glasses that have been already
used.]

JULIE. Where did you get that wine?

JEAN. From the cellar.

JULIE. My father's Burgundy.

JEAN. What's the matter, isn't that good enough for the son-in-law?

JULIE. And I drink beer--I!

JEAN. That only goes to prove that your taste is poorer than mine.

JULIE. Thief!

JEAN. Do you intend to tattle?

JULIE. Oh ho! Accomplice to a house thief. Was I intoxicated--have I
been walking in my sleep this night--midsummer night, the night for
innocent play--

JEAN. Innocent, eh!

JULIE [Pacing back and forth]. Is there a being on earth so miserable as
I.

JEAN. Why are you, after such a conquest. Think of Kristin in there,
don't you think she has feelings too?

JULIE. I thought so a little while ago, but I don't any more. A servant
is a servant.

JEAN. And a whore is a whore.

JULIE [Falls on her knees with clasped hands]. Oh, God in heaven, end
my wretched life, save me from this mire into which I'm sinking--Oh save
me, save me.

JEAN. I can't deny that it hurts me to see you like this.

JULIE. And you who wanted to die for me.

JEAN. In the oat-bin? Oh, that was only talk.

JULIE. That is to say--a lie!

JEAN [Beginning to show sleepiness]. Er--er almost. I believe I read
something of the sort in a newspaper about a chimney-sweep who made
a death bed for himself of syringa blossoms in a wood-bin--[laughs]
because they were going to arrest him for non-support of his children.

JULIE. So you are such a--

JEAN. What better could I have hit on! One must always be romantic to
capture a woman.

JULIE. Wretch! Now you have seen the eagle's back, and I suppose I am to
be the first limb--

JEAN. And the limb is rotten--

JULIE [Without seeming to hear]. And I am to be the hotel's signboard--

JEAN. And I the hotel--

JULIE. And sit behind the desk and allure guests and overcharge them--

JEAN. Oh, that'll be my business.

JULIE. That a soul can be so degraded!

JEAN. Look to your own soul.

JULIE. Lackey! Servant! Stand up when I speak.

JEAN. Don't you dare to moralize to me. Lackey, eh! Do you think you
have shown yourself finer than any maid-servant tonight?

JULIE [Crushed]. That is right, strike me, trample on me, I deserve
nothing better. I have done wrong, but help me now. Help me out of this
if there is any possible way.

JEAN [Softens somewhat]. I don't care to shirk my share of the blame,
but do you think any one of my position would ever have dared to raise
his eyes to you if you yourself had not invited it? Even now I am
astonished--

JULIE. And proud.

JEAN. Why not? Although I must confess that the conquest was too easy to
be exciting.

JULIE. Go on, strike me again--

JEAN [Rising]. No, forgive me, rather, for what I said. I do not strike
the unarmed, least of all, a woman. But I can't deny that from a certain
point of view it gives me satisfaction to know that it is the glitter of
brass, not gold, that dazzles us from below, and that the eagle's back
is grey like the rest of him. On the other hand, I'm sorry to have to
realize that all that I have looked up to is not worth while, and it
pains me to see you fallen lower than your cook as it pains me to see
autumn blossoms whipped to pieces by the cold rain and transformed
into--dirt!

JULIE. You speak as though you were already my superior.

JEAN. And so I am! For I can make you a countess and you could never
make me a count.

JULIE. But I am born of a count, that you can never be.

JEAN. That is true, but I can be the father of counts--if--

JULIE. But you are a thief--that I am not.

JEAN. There are worse things than that, and for that matter when I serve
in a house I regard myself as a member of the family, a child of the
house as it were. And one doesn't consider it theft if children snoop
a berry from full bushes. [With renewed passion]. Miss Julie, you are a
glorious woman--too good for such as I. You have been the victim of an
infatuation and you want to disguise this fault by fancying that you
love me. But you do not--unless perhaps my outer self attracts you. And
then your love is no better than mine. But I cannot be satisfied with
that, and your real love I can never awaken.

JULIE. Are you sure of that?

JEAN. You mean that we could get along with such an arrangement? There's
no doubt about my loving you--you are beautiful, you are elegant--[Goes
to her and takes her hand] accomplished, lovable when you wish to be,
and the flame that you awaken in man does not die easily. [Puts arm
around her.] You are like hot wine with strong spices, and your lips--

[Tries to kiss her. Julie pulls herself away slowly.]

JULIE. Leave me--I'm not to be won this way.

JEAN. How then? Not with caresses and beautiful words? Not by thoughts
for the future, to save humiliation? How then?

JULIE. How? I don't know. I don't know! I shrink from you as I would
from a rat. But I cannot escape from you.

JEAN. Escape with me.

JULIE. Escape? Yes, we must escape.--But I'm so tired. Give me a glass
of wine. [Jean fills a glass with wine, Julie looks at her watch.] We
must talk it over first for we have still a little time left.

[She empties the glass and puts it out for more.]

JEAN. Don't drink too much. It will go to your head.

JULIE. What harm will that do?

JEAN. What harm? It's foolish to get intoxicated. But what did you want
to say?

JULIE. We must go away, but we must talk first. That is, I must speak,
for until now you have done all the talking. You have told me about
your life--now I will tell you about mine, then we will know each other
through and through before we start on our wandering together.

JEAN. One moment, pardon. Think well whether you won't regret having
told your life's secrets.

JULIE. Aren't you my friend?

JEAN. Yes. Sometimes. But don't depend on me.

JULIE. You only say that. And for that matter I have no secrets. You
see, my mother was not of noble birth. She was brought up with ideas of
equality, woman's freedom and all that. She had very decided opinions
against matrimony, and when my father courted her she declared that she
would never be his wife--but she did so for all that. I came into the
world against my mother's wishes, I discovered, and was brought up like
a child of nature by my mother, and taught everything that a boy must
know as well; I was to be an example of a woman being as good as a
man--I was made to go about in boy's clothes and take care of the horses
and harness and saddle and hunt, and all such things; in fact, all over
the estate women servants were taught to do men's work, with the result
that the property came near being ruined--and so we became the laughing
stock of the countryside. At last my father must have awakened from his
bewitched condition, for he revolted, and ran things according to his
ideas. My mother became ill--what it was I don't know, but she often had
cramps and acted queerly--sometimes hiding in the attic or the orchard,
and would even be gone all night at times. Then came the big fire which
of course you have heard about. The house, the stables--everything was
burned, under circumstances that pointed strongly to an incendiary, for
the misfortune happened the day after the quarterly insurance was
due and the premiums sent in by father were strangely delayed by his
messenger so that they arrived too late. [She fills a wine glass and
drinks.]

JEAN. Don't drink any more.

JULIE. Oh, what does it matter? My father was utterly at a loss to know
where to get money to rebuild with. Then my mother suggested that he
try to borrow from a man who had been her friend in her youth--a brick
manufacturer here in the neighborhood. My father made the loan, but
wasn't allowed to pay any interest, which surprised him. Then the house
was rebuilt. [Julie drinks again.] Do you know who burned the house?

JEAN. Her ladyship, your mother?

JULIE. Do you know who the brick manufacturer was?

JEAN. Your mother's lover?

JULIE. Do you know whose money it was?

JEAN. Just a moment, that I don't know.

JULIE. It was my mother's.

JEAN. The Count's--that is to say, unless there was a contract.

JULIE. There was no contract. My mother had some money which she had not
wished to have in my father's keeping and therefore, she had entrusted
it to her friend's care.

JEAN. Who kept it.

JULIE. Quite right--he held on to it. All this came to my father's
knowledge. He couldn't proceed against him, wasn't allowed to pay his
wife's friend, and couldn't prove that it was his wife's money. That was
my mother's revenge for his taking the reins of the establishment into
his own hands. At that time he was ready to shoot himself. Gossip had it
that he had tried and failed. Well, he lived it down--and my mother paid
full penalty for her misdeed. Those were five terrible years for me,
as you can fancy. I sympathized with my father, but I took my mother's
part, for I didn't know the true circumstances. Through her I learned to
distrust and hate men, and I swore to her never to be a man's slave.

JEAN. But you became engaged to the Lieutenant Governor.

JULIE. Just to make him my slave.

JEAN. But that he didn't care to be.

JULIE. He wanted to be, fast enough, but I grew tired of him.

JEAN. Yes--I noticed that--in the stable-yard!

JULIE. What do you mean?

JEAN. I saw how he broke the engagement.

JULIE. That's a lie. It was I who broke it. Did he say he broke it--the
wretch!

JEAN. I don't believe that he was a wretch. You hate men, Miss Julie.

JULIE. Most of them. Sometimes one is weak--

JEAN. You hate me?

JULIE. Excessively. I could see you shot--

JEAN. Like a mad dog?

JULIE. Exactly!

JEAN. But there is nothing here to shoot with. What shall we do then?

JULIE [Rousing herself].We must get away from here--travel.

JEAN. And torture each other to death?

JULIE. No--to enjoy, a few days, a week--as long as we can. And then to
die.

JEAN. Die! How silly. I think it's better to start the hotel.

JULIE [Not heeding him]. By the Lake of Como where the sun is always
shining, where the laurel is green at Christmas and the oranges glow.

JEAN. The Lake of Como is a rain hole, I never saw any oranges there
except on fruit stands. But it's a good resort, and there are many
villas to rent to loving couples. That's a very paying industry. You
know why? They take leases for half a year at least, but they usually
leave in three weeks.

JULIE [Naively]. Why after three weeks?

JEAN. Why? They quarrel of course, but the rent must be paid all the
same. Then you re-let, and so one after another they come and go, for
there is plenty of love, although it doesn't last long.

JULIE. Then you don't want to die with me?

JEAN. I don't want to die at all, both because I enjoy living and
because I regard suicide as a crime to Him who has given us life.

JULIE. Then you believe in God?

JEAN. Yes. Of course I do, and I go to church every other Sunday--But
I'm tired of all this and I'm going to bed.

JULIE. Do you think I would allow myself to be satisfied with such an
ending? Do you know what a man owes to a woman he hits-- --

JEAN [Takes out a silver coin and throws it on the table]. Allow me, I
don't want to owe anything to anyone.

JULIE [Pretending not to notice the insult]. Do you know what the law
demands?

JEAN. I know that the law demands nothing of a woman who seduces a man.

JULIE [Again not heeding him]. Do you see any way out of it but to
travel?--wed--and separate?

JEAN. And if I protest against this misalliance?

JULIE. Misalliance!

JEAN. Yes, for me. For you see I have a finer ancestry than you, for I
have no fire-bug in my family.

JULIE. How do you know?

JEAN. You can't prove the contrary. We have no family record except that
which the police keep. But your pedigree I have read in a book on the
drawing room table. Do you know who the founder of your family was? It
was a miller whose wife found favor with the king during the Danish War.
Such ancestry I have not.

JULIE. This is my reward for opening my heart to anyone so unworthy,
with whom I have talked about my family honor.

JEAN. Dishonor--yes, I said it. I told you not to drink because then one
talks too freely and one should never talk.

JULIE. Oh, how I repent all this. If at least you loved me!

JEAN. For the last time--what do you mean? Shall I weep, shall I jump
over your riding whip, shall I kiss you, lure you to Lake Como for three
weeks, and then--what do you want anyway? This is getting tiresome. But
that's the way it always is when you get mixed up in women's affairs.
Miss Julie, I see that you are unhappy, I know that you suffer, but I
can't understand you. Among my kind there is no nonsense of this sort;
we love as we play when work gives us time. We haven't the whole day and
night for it like you.

JULIE. You must be good to me and speak to me as though I were a human
being.

JEAN. Be one yourself. You spit on me and expect me to stand it.

JULIE. Help me, help me. Only tell me what to do--show me a way out of
this!

JEAN. In heaven's name, if I only knew myself.

JULIE. I have been raving, I have been mad, but is there no means of
deliverance?

JEAN. Stay here at home and say nothing. No one knows.

JULIE. Impossible. These people know it, and Kristin.

JEAN. They don't know it and could never suspect such a thing.

JULIE [Hesitating]. But--it might happen again.

JEAN. That is true.

JULIE. And the consequences?

JEAN [Frightened]. Consequences--where were my wits not to have thought
of that! There is only one thing to do. Get away from here immediately.
I can't go with you or they will suspect. You must go alone--away from
here--anywhere.

JULIE. Alone? Where? I cannot.

JEAN. You must--and before the Count returns. If you stay, we know how
it will be. If one has taken a false step it's likely to happen again as
the harm has already been done, and one grows more and more daring
until at last all is discovered. Write the Count afterward and confess
all--except that it was I. That he could never guess, and I don't think
he'll be so anxious to know who it was, anyway.

JULIE. I will go if you'll go with me.

JEAN. Are you raving again? Miss Julie running away with her coachman?
All the papers would be full of it and that the Count could never live
through.

JULIE. I can't go--I can't stay. Help me, I'm so tired--so weary.
Command me, set me in motion--I can't think any more,--can't act--

JEAN. See now, what creatures you aristocrats are! Why do you bristle up
and stick up your noses as though you were the lords of creation. Very
well--I will command you! Go up and dress yourself and see to it that
you have travelling money and then come down. [She hesitates.] Go
immediately.

[She still hesitates. He takes her hand and leads her to door.]

JULIE. Speak gently to me, Jean.

JEAN. A command always sounds harsh. Feel it yourself now.

[Exit Julie.]

[Jean draws a sigh of relief, seats himself by the table, takes out a
notebook and pencil and counts aloud now and then until Kristin comes
in, dressed for church.]

KRISTIN. My heavens, how it looks here. What's been going on?

JEAN. Oh, Miss Julie dragged in the people. Have you been sleeping so
soundly that you didn't hear anything?

KRISTIN. I've slept like a log.

JEAN. And already dressed for church!

KRISTIN. Ye-es, [Sleepily] didn't you promise to go to early service
with me?

JEAN. Yes, quite so, and there you have my stock and front. All right.

[He seats himself. Kristin putting on his stock.]

JEAN [Sleepily]. What is the text today?

KRISTIN. St. John's Day! It is of course about the beheading of John the
Baptist.

JEAN. I'm afraid it will be terribly long drawn out--that. Hey, you're
choking me. I'm so sleepy, so sleepy.

KRISTIN. What have you been doing up all night? You are actually green
in the face.

JEAN. I have been sitting here talking to Miss Julie.

KRISTIN. Oh you don't know your place.

[Pause.]

JEAN. Listen, Kristin.

KRISTIN. Well?

JEAN. It's queer about her when you think it over.

KRISTIN. What is queer?

JEAN. The whole thing.

[Pause. Kristin looks at half empty glasses on table.]

KRISTIN. Have you been drinking together, too?

JEAN. Yes!

KRISTIN. For shame. Look me in the eye.

JEAN. Yes.

KRISTIN. Is it possible? Is it possible?

JEAN [After reflecting]. Yes, it is.

KRISTIN. Ugh! That I would never have believed. For shame, for shame!

JEAN. You are not jealous of her?

KRISTIN. No, not of her. But if it had been Clara or Sophie--then I
would have scratched your eyes out. So that is what has happened--how I
can't understand! No, that wasn't very nice!

JEAN. Are you mad at her?

KRISTIN. No, but with you. That was bad of you, very bad. Poor girl. Do
you know what--I don't want to be here in this house any longer where
one cannot respect one's betters.

JEAN. Why should one respect them?

KRISTIN. Yes, you can say that, you are so smart. But I don't want to
serve people who behave so. It reflects on oneself, I think.

JEAN. Yes, but it's a comfort that they're not a bit better than we.

KRISTIN. No, I don't think so, for if they are not better there's no
use in our trying to better ourselves in this world. And to think of the
Count! Think of him who has had so much sorrow all his days? No, I don't
want to stay in this house any longer! And to think of it being with
such as you! If it had been the Lieutenant--

JEAN. What's that?

KRISTIN. Yes! He was good enough, to be sure, but there's a difference
between people just the same. No, this I can never forget. Miss Julie
who was always so proud and indifferent to men! One never would believe
that she would give herself--and to one like you! She who was ready to
have Diana shot because she would run after the gatekeeper's mongrels.
Yes, I say it--and here I won't stay any longer and on the twenty-fourth
of October I go my way.

JEAN. And then?

KRISTIN. Well, as we've come to talk about it, it's high time you looked
around for something else, since we're going to get married.

JEAN. Well, what'll I look for? A married man couldn't get a place like
this.

KRISTIN. No, of course not. But you could take a gatekeeper's job or
look for a watchman's place in some factory. The government's plums are
few, but they are sure. And then the wife and children get a pension--

JEAN [With a grimace]. That's all very fine--all that, but it's not
exactly in my line to think about dying for my wife and children just
now. I must confess that I have slightly different aspirations.

KRISTIN. Aspirations? Aspirations--anyway you have obligations. Think of
those, you.

JEAN. Don't irritate me with talk about my obligations. I know my own
business. [He listens.] We'll have plenty of time for all this some
other day. Go and get ready and we'll be off to church.

KRISTIN [Listening]. Who's that walking upstairs?

JEAN. I don't know--unless it's Clara.

KRISTIN [Starting to go]. It could never be the Count who has come home
without anyone hearing him?

JEAN [Frightened]. The Count! I can't believe that. He would have rung
the bell.

KRISTIN. God help us! Never have I been mixed up in anything like this!

[Exit Kristin. The sun has risen and lights up the scene. Presently the
sunshine comes in through windows at an angle. Jean goes to door and
motions. Enter Julie, dressed for travelling, carrying a small bird cage
covered with a cloth, which she places on a chair.]

JULIE. I am ready!

JEAN. Hush, Kristin is stirring!

[Julie frightened and nervous throughout following scene.]

JULIE. Does she suspect anything?

JEAN. She knows nothing. But, good heavens, how you look!

JULIE. Why?

JEAN. You are pale as a ghost.

JULIE [Sighs]. Am I? Oh, the sun is rising, the sun!

JEAN. And now the troll's spell is broken.

JULIE. The trolls have indeed been at work this night. But, Jean,
listen--come with me, I have money enough.

JEAN. Plenty?

JULIE. Enough to start with. Go with me for I can't go alone--today,
midsummer day. Think of the stuffy train, packed in with the crowds of
people staring at one; the long stops at the stations when one would
be speeding away. No, I cannot, I cannot! And then the memories,
childhood's memories of midsummer day--the church decorated with birch
branches and syringa blossoms; the festive dinner table with relations
and friends, afternoon in the park, music, dancing, flowers and
games--oh, one may fly, fly, but anguish and remorse follow in the pack
wagon.

JEAN. I'll go with you--if we leave instantly--before it's too late.

JULIE. Go and dress then. [She takes up bird cage.]

JEAN. But no baggage! That would betray us.

JULIE. Nothing but what we can take in the coupé.

[Jean has picked up his hat.]

JEAN. What have you there?

JULIE. It's only my canary. I cannot, will not, leave it behind.

JEAN. So we are to lug a bird cage with us. Are you crazy? Let go of it.

JULIE. It is all I take from home. The only living creature that cares
for me. Don't be hard--let me take it with me.

JEAN. Let go the cage and don't talk so loud. Kristin will hear us.

JULIE. No, I will not leave it to strange hands. I would rather see it
dead.

JEAN. Give me the creature. I'll fix it.

JULIE. Yes, but don't hurt it. Don't--no, I cannot.

JEAN. Let go. I can.

JULIE [Takes the canary from cage]. Oh, my little siren. Must your
mistress part with you?

JEAN. Be so good as not to make a scene. Your welfare, your life, is at
stake. So--quickly. [Snatches bird from her and goes to chopping block
and takes up meat chopper]. You should have learned how to chop off a
chicken's head instead of shooting with a revolver. [He chops off the
bird's head]. Then you wouldn't swoon at a drop of blood.

JULIE [Shrieks]. Kill me, too. Kill me! You who can butcher an innocent
bird without a tremble. Oh, how I shrink from you. I curse the moment I
first saw you. I curse the moment I was conceived in my mother's womb.

JEAN. Come now! What good is your cursing, let's be off.

JULIE [Looks toward chopping block as though obsessed by thought of the
slain bird]. No, I cannot. I must see-- --hush, a carriage is passing.
Don't you think I can stand the sight of blood? You think I am weak.
Oh, I should like to see your blood flowing--to see your brain on the
chopping block, all your sex swimming in a sea of blood. I believe I
could drink out of your skull, bathe my feet in your breast and eat your
heart cooked whole. You think I am weak; you believe that I love you
because my life has mingled with yours; you think that I would carry
your offspring under my heart, and nourish it with my blood--give birth
to your child and take your name! Hear, you, what are you called, what
is your family name? But I'm sure you have none. I should be "Mrs.
Gate-Keeper," perhaps, or "Madame Dumpheap." You dog with my collar on,
you lackey with my father's hallmark on your buttons. I play rival to my
cook--oh--oh--oh! You believe that I am cowardly and want to run away.
No, now I shall stay. The thunder may roll. My father will return--and
find his desk broken into--his money gone! Then he will ring--that bell.
A scuffle with his servant--then sends for the police--and then I tell
all--everything! Oh, it will be beautiful to have it all over with--if
only that were the end! And my father--he'll have a shock and die, and
then that will be the end. Then they will place his swords across the
coffin--and the Count's line is extinct. The serf's line will continue
in an orphanage, win honors in the gutter and end in prison.

JEAN. Now it is the king's blood talking. Splendid, Miss Julie! Only
keep the miller in his sack.

[Enter Kristin with prayer-book in hand.]

JULIE [Hastening to Kristin and falls in her arms as though seeking
protection]. Help me, Kristin, help me against this man.

KRISTIN [Cold and unmoved]. What kind of performance is this for a holy
day morning? What does this mean--this noise and fuss?

JULIE. Kristin, you are a woman,--and my friend. Beware of this wretch.

JEAN [A little embarrassed and surprised]. While the ladies are arguing
I'll go and shave myself.

[Jean goes, R.]

JULIE. You must understand me--you must listen to me.

KRISTIN. No--I can't understand all this bosh. Where may you be going in
your traveling dress?--and he had his hat on! Hey?

JULIE. Listen to me, Kristin, listen to me and I'll tell you everything.

KRISTIN. I don't want to know anything--

JULIE. You must listen to me--

KRISTIN. What about? Is it that foolishness with Jean? That doesn't
concern me at all. That I won't be mixed up with, but if you're trying
to lure him to run away with you then we must put a stop to it.

JULIE [Nervously]. Try to be calm now Kristin, and listen to me. I can't
stay here and Jean can't stay here. That being true, we must leave--
--Kristin.

KRISTIN. Hm, hm!

JULIE [Brightening up]. But I have an idea--what if we three should
go--away--to foreign parts. To Switzerland and set up a hotel
together--I have money you see--and Jean and I would back the whole
thing, you could run the kitchen. Won't that be fine? Say yes, now--and
come with us--there everything would be arranged--say yes! [Throws her
arms around Kristin and coaxes her].

KRISTIN [Cold and reflecting]. Hm--hm!

JULIE [Presto tempo]. You have never been out and traveled, Kristin.
You shall look about you in the world. You can't believe how pleasant
traveling on a train is--new faces continually, new countries--and
we'll go to Hamburg--and passing through we'll see the zoological
gardens--that you will like--then we'll go to the theatre and hear the
opera--and when we reach Munich there will be the museum--there are
Rubins and Raphaels and all the big painters that you know--you have
heard of Munich--where King Ludwig lived--the King, you know, who went
mad. Then we'll see his palace--a palace like those in the Sagas--and
from there it isn't far to Switzerland--and the Alps, the Alps mind you
with snow in mid-summer. And there oranges grow and laurel--green all
the year round if--[Jean is seen in the doorway R. stropping his razor
on the strop which he holds between his teeth and left hand. He listens
and nods his head favorably now and then. Julie continues, tempo
prestissimo] And there we'll take a hotel and I'll sit taking the cash
while Jean greets the guests--goes out and markets--writes letters--that
will be life, you may believe--then the train whistles--then the omnibus
comes--then a bell rings upstairs, then in the restaurant--and then
I make out the bills--and I can salt them--you can't think how people
tremble when they receive their bill--and you--you can sit like a
lady--of course you won't have to stand over the stove--you can dress
finely and neatly when you show yourself to the people--and you with
your appearance--Oh, I'm not flattering, you can catch a husband some
fine day--a rich Englishman perhaps--they are so easy to--[Slowing up]
to catch-- --Then we'll be rich--and then we'll build a villa by Lake
Como--to be sure it rains sometimes--but [becoming languid] the sun must
shine too sometimes-- -- --although it seems dark-- -- --and if not--we
can at least travel homeward--and come back--here--or some other place.

KRISTIN. Listen now. Does Miss Julie believe in all this?

[Julie going to pieces.]

JULIE. Do I believe in it?

KRISTIN. Yes.

JULIE [Tired]. I don't know. I don't believe in anything any more.
[Sinks down on bench, and takes head in her hand on table.] In
nothing--nothing!

KRISTIN [Turns to R. and looks toward Jean]. So--you intended to run
away?

JEAN [Rather shamefaced comes forward and puts razor on table]. Run
away? That's putting it rather strong. You heard Miss Julie's project, I
think it might be carried out.

KRISTIN. Now listen to that! Was it meant that I should be her cook--

JEAN [Sharply]. Be so good as to use proper language when you speak of
your mistress.

KRISTIN. Mistress?

JEAN. Yes.

KRISTIN. No--hear! Listen to him!

JEAN. Yes, you listen--you need to, and talk less. Miss Julie is your
mistress and for the same reason that you do not respect her now you
should not respect yourself.

KRISTIN. I have always had so much respect for myself--

JEAN. That you never had any left for others!

KRISTIN. I have never lowered my position. Let any one say, if they can,
that the Count's cook has had anything to do with the riding master or
the swineherd. Let them come and say it!

JEAN. Yes, you happened to get a fine fellow. That was your good luck.

KRISTIN. Yes, a fine fellow--who sells the Count's oats from his stable.

JEAN. Is it for you to say anything--you who get a commission on all the
groceries and a bribe from the butcher?

KRISTIN. What's that?

JEAN. And you can't have respect for your master and mistress any
longer--you, you!

KRISTIN [Glad to change the subject]. Are you coming to church with me?
You need a good sermon for your actions.

JEAN. No, I'm not going to church today. You can go alone--and confess
your doings.

KRISTIN. Yes, that I shall do, and I shall return with so much
forgiveness that there will be enough for you too. The Savior suffered
and died on the cross for all our sins, and when we go to Him in faith
and a repentant spirit he takes our sins on Himself.

JULIE. Do you believe that, Kristin?

KRISTIN. That is my life's belief, as true as I stand here. And that was
my childhood's belief that I have kept since my youth, Miss Julie. And
where sin overflows, there mercy overflows also.

JULIE. Oh, if I only had your faith. Oh, if--

KRISTIN. Yes, but you see that is not given without God's particular
grace, and that is not allotted to all, that!

JULIE. Who are the chosen?

KRISTIN. That is the great secret of the Kingdom of Grace, and the Lord
has no respect for persons. But there the last shall be first.

JULIE. But then has he respect for the last--the lowliest person?

KRISTIN [Continuing]. It is easier for a camel to pass through the eye
of a needle than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of Heaven. That's
the way it is, Miss Julie. However--now I am going--alone. And on my
way I shall stop in and tell the stable boy not to let any horses go out
in case any one wants to get away before the Count comes home. Good bye.

[Exit Kristin.]

JEAN. Such a devil. And all this on account of your confounded canary!

JULIE [Tired]. Oh, don't speak of the canary--do you see any way
out--any end to this?

JEAN [Thinking]. No.

JULIE. What would you do in my place?

JEAN. In your place--wait. As a noble lady, as a woman--fallen--I don't
know. Yes, now I know.

JULIE [She takes up razor from table and makes gestures saying] This?

JEAN. Yes. But _I_ should not do it, mark you, for there is a difference
between us.

JULIE. Because you are a man and I am a woman? What other difference is
there?

JEAN. That very difference--of man and woman.

JULIE [Razor in hand]. I want to do it--but I can't. My father couldn't
either that time when he should have done it.

JEAN. No, he was right, not to do it--he had to avenge himself first.

JULIE. And now my mother revenges herself again through me.

JEAN. Haven't you loved your father, Miss Julie?

JULIE. Yes, deeply. But I have probably hated him too, I must
have--without being aware of it. And it is due to my father's training
that I have learned to scorn my own sex. Between them both they
have made me half man, half woman. Whose is the fault for what has
happened--my father's? My mother's? My own? I haven't anything of my
own. I haven't a thought which was not my father's--not a passion that
wasn't my mother's. And last of all from my betrothed the idea that all
people are equal. For that I now call him a wretch. How can it be my
own fault then? Throw the burden on Jesus as Kristin did? No, I am too
proud, too intelligent, thanks to my father's teaching.-- --And that a
rich man cannot enter the Kingdom of Heaven--that is a lie, and Kristin,
who has money in the savings bank--she surely cannot enter there. Whose
is the fault? What does it concern us whose fault it is? It is I who
must bear the burden and the consequences.

JEAN. Yes, but-- --

[Two sharp rings on bell are heard. Julie starts to her feet. Jean
changes his coat.]

JEAN. The Count--has returned. Think if Kristin has-- [Goes up to
speaking tube and listens.]

JULIE. Now he has seen the desk!

JEAN [Speaking in the tube]. It is Jean, Excellency. [Listens]. Yes,
Excellency. [Listens].Yes, Excellency,--right away--immediately,
Excellency. Yes--in half an hour.

JULIE [In great agitation]. What did he say? In Heaven's name, what did
he say?

JEAN. He wants his boots and coffee in a half hour.

JULIE. In half an hour then. Oh, I'm so tired--I'm incapable of feeling,
not able to be sorry, not able to go, not able to stay, not able to
live--not able to die. Help me now. Command me--I will obey like a dog.
Do me this last service--save my honor. Save his name. You know what
I have the will to do--but cannot do. You will it and command me to
execute your will.

JEAN. I don't know why--but now I can't either.--I don't understand
myself. It is absolutely as though this coat does it--but I can't
command you now. And since the Count spoke to me-- --I can't account for
it--but oh, it is that damned servant in my back--I believe if the Count
came in here now and told me to cut my throat I would do it on the spot.

JULIE. Make believe you are he--and I you. You could act so well a
little while ago when you knelt at my feet. Then you were a nobleman--or
haven't you ever been at the theatre and seen the hypnotist--[Jean
nods] He says to his subject "Take the broom," and he takes it; he says,
"Sweep," and he sweeps.

JEAN. Then the subject must be asleep!

JULIE [Ecstatically]. I sleep already. The whole room is like smoke
before me--and you are like a tall black stove, like a man clad in black
clothes with a high hat; and your eyes gleam like the hot coals when
the fire is dying; and your face a white spot like fallen ashes. [The
sunshine is coming in through the windows and falls on Jean. Julie
rubs her hands as though warming them before a fire]. It is so warm and
good--and so bright and quiet!

JEAN [Takes razor and puts it in her hand]. There is the broom, go now
while it's bright--out to the hay loft--and--[He whispers in her ear.]

JULIE [Rousing herself]. Thanks. And now I go to rest. But tell me
this--the foremost may receive the gift of Grace? Say it, even if you
don't believe it.

JEAN. The foremost? No, I can't say that. But wait, Miss Julie--you are
no longer among the foremost since you are of the lowliest.

JULIE. That's true, I am the lowliest--the lowliest of the lowly. Oh,
now I can't go. Tell me once more that I must go.

JEAN. No, now I cannot either--I cannot.

JULIE. And the first shall be last-- -- --

JEAN. Don't think. You take my strength from me, too, so that I become
cowardly.--What-- --I thought I heard the bell!-- -- No! To be afraid
of the sound of a bell! But it's not the bell--it's someone behind the
bell, the hand that sets the bell in motion--and something else that
sets the hand in motion. But stop your ears, stop your ears. Then he
will only ring louder and keep on ringing until it's answered--and then
it is too late! Then come the police and then--[Two loud rings on
bell are heard, Jean falls in a heap for a moment, but straightens up
immediately.] It is horrible! But there is no other way. Go!

[Countess Julie goes out resolutely.]

CURTAIN.

*****





THE OUTLAW


CHARACTERS

     THORFINN, Erl of Iceland
     VALGERD, his wife
     GUNLÖD, their daughter
     GUNNAR, a Crusader
     ORM, a minstrel, foster brother to Thorfinn
     A THRALL
     A MESSENGER

Action takes place in Iceland.



[SCENE--A hut, door at back, window-holes, right and, left, closed by
big heavy wooden shutters. Wooden benches against walls, the high bench,
a sort of rude throne, at left. The uprights of this high beach are
carved with images of the gods Odin and Thor. From the wall beams hang
swords, battle axes and shields. Near the high bench stands a harp.
Gunlöd stands at an open window-hole peering out; through the opening
one gets a glimpse of the sea lighted by the aurora borealis. Valgerd
sits by the fire, which is in the middle of the room, spinning.]

VALGERD. Close the window-hole.

[Gunlöd is silent.]

VALGERD. Gunlöd!

GUNLÖD. Did you speak, mother?

VALGERD. What are you doing?

GUNLÖD. I am watching the sea.

VALGERD. When will you learn to forget?

GUNLÖD. Take everything away from me but memories!

VALGERD. Look forward--not back.

GUNLÖD. Who reproaches the strong viking who looks back when he is
quitting his native strand?

VALGERD. You have had three winters to make your farewell.

GUNLÖD. You speak truly--three winters! For here never came a summer!

VALGERD. When the floating ice melts, then shall spring be here.

GUNLÖD. The Northern Lights melt no ice.

VALGERD. Nor your tears.

GUNLÖD. You never saw me weep.

VALGERD. But I have heard you. As long as you do that, you are a child.

GUNLÖD. I am not a child.

VALGERD. If you would be a woman, suffer in silence.

GUNLÖD. I'll cast sorrow from me, mother.

VALGERD. No, no--bury it, as your deepest treasure. The seed must not
lie on top of the earth if it would sprout and ripen. You have a deep
sorrow. It should bear great gladness--and great peace.

GUNLÖD [After a pause]. I shall forget.

VALGERD. Everything?

GUNLÖD. I shall try.

VALGERD. Can you forget your father's hardness?

GUNLÖD. That I have forgotten.

VALGERD. Can you forget that there was a time when your fore-fathers'
dwelling stood on Brövikens' strand? Where the south wind sang in the
oak wood when the ice-bound seas ran free--where the hemlocks gave forth
their fragrance and the finches twittered among the linden trees--and
Balder, the God of spring and joy, lulled you to sleep on the green
meadows? Can you forget all this, while you listen to the sea gulls'
plaints on these bare rocks and cliffs, and the cold storms out of the
north howl through the stunted birches?

GUNLÖD. Yes!

VALGERD. Can you forget the friend of your childhood from whom your
father tore you to save you from the white Christ?

GUNLÖD [in desperation]. Yes, yes!

VALGERD. You are weeping.

GUNLÖD [Disturbed]. Some one is walking out there. Perhaps father is
coming home.

VALGERD. Will you bear in mind every day without tears that we now dwell
in the land of ice--fugitives from the kingdom of Svea and hated here by
the Christ-men? But we have suffered no loss of greatness, although
we have not been baptized and kissed the bishop's hand. Have you ever
spoken to any of the Christians since we have been here?

GUNLÖD [After a pause]. No. Tell me, mother, is it true that father is
to be Erl here in Iceland, too?

VALGERD. Don't let that trouble you, child.

GUNLÖD. Then I'm afraid he will fare badly with the Christians.

VALGERD. You fear that?

GUNLÖD. Some one is out there.

VALGERD [Anxiously]. Did you see the ship lying in the inlet this
morning?

GUNLÖD. With heart-felt gladness!

VALGERD. Bore it the figure-head of Thorfinn?

GUNLÖD. That I could not make out.

VALGERD. Have a care, girl.

GUNLÖD. Is it tonight that I may go out?

VALGERD. Tomorrow--that you know well.

GUNLÖD Mother!

VALGERD [Going]. Mind the fire. [Valgerd goes.]

[Gunlöd looks after her mother, then cautiously takes from her breast a
crucifix, puts it on the high bench and falls on her knees.]

GUNLÖD. Christ, Christ, forgive me the lie I told. [Springs up noticing
the images of the gods on the high bench.] No, I cannot pray before
these wicked images. [She looks for another place.] Holy St. Olof,
holy--oh, I can't remember how the bishop named her! God! God! Cast me
not into purgatory for this sin! I will repeat the whole long prayer
of the monks--credo, credo--in patrem--oh, I have forgotten that too. I
shall give five tall candles for the altar of the mother of God the next
time I go to the chapel--Credo, in patrem omnipotentem--[Kissing the
crucifix eagerly.]

[A song is heard outside the hut accompanied by a lyre.]

    A crusader went out to the Holy Land,
    O, Christ, take the maiden's soul in hand,
    And to your kingdom bring her!
    I'll return, mayhap, when the spruce trees bloom.

    Summers three he wanders far from thee,
    Where nightingales sing their delight,
    And masses he holds both day and night,
    At the holy sepulchre's chapel.
    I'll return, mayhap, when the spruce trees bloom.

    When the palm trees bud on Jordan's strand,
    Then makes he a prayer to God,
    That he may return to his native land,
    And press to his heart his love.
    I'll return, my love, when the spruce trees bloom.

GUNLÖD [At beginning of song springs up and then listens with more and
more agitation and eagerness. When the song is over she goes toward door
to bolt it, but so slowly that Gunnar is able to enter before she slips
the bolt. Gunnar is clad in the costume of a crusader with a lyre swung
across his shoulder.]

GUNNAR. Gunlöd! [They embrace. Gunlöd pulls away and goes toward door.]
You are afraid of me? What is it, Gunlöd?

GUNLÖD. You never took me in your arms before!

GUNNAR. We were children then!

GUNLÖD You are right--we were children then. What means that silver
falcon on your shield? I saw it on your ship's bow this morning, too.

GUNNAR. You saw my ship--you knew my song, and you would have barred the
door against me! What am I to understand, Gunlöd?

GUNLÖD. Oh, ask me nothing! I am so unquiet of spirit but sit and let me
talk to you.

GUNNAR [Sits]. You are silent.

GUNLÖD. You are silent, too.

GUNNAR [Pulls her to his side]. Gunlöd, Gunlöd--has the snow fallen so
heavily that memories have been chilled even the mountains here burst
forth with fire--and you are cold as a snow wind--but speak--speak! Why
are you here in Iceland--and what has happened?

GUNLÖD. Terrible things--and more may follow if you stay here
longer.--[Springs up]. Go, before my father comes.

GUNNAR. Do you think I would leave you now--I, who have sought you for
long years? When I could not find you in the home land I went to the
wars against the Saracens to seek you the other side of the grave. But
my time had not yet come; when the fourth spring came, I heard through
wandering merchants that you were to be found here. Now I have found
you--and you wish me to leave you in this heathen darkness.

GUNLÖD. I am not alone!

GUNNAR. Your father does not love you--your mother does not understand
you, and they are both heathen.

GUNLÖD. I have friends among the Christians.

GUNNAR. Then you have become a Christian, Gunlöd!--the holy virgin has
heard my prayer.

GUNLÖD. Yes, yes! Oh, let me kiss the cross you bear on your
shoulder--that you got at the holy sepulchre!

GUNNAR. Now I give you a brother Christian's kiss--the first, Gunlöd,
you have from me.

GUNLÖD. You must never kiss me again.

GUNNAR. But tell me, how did you become a Christian?

GUNLÖD. First I believed in my father--he was so strong; then I believed
in my mother--she was so good; last I believed in you--you were so
strong and good--and so beautiful; and when you went away--I stood
alone--myself I could never believe in--I was so weak; then I thought of
your God, whom you so often begged me to love--and I prayed to Him.

GUNNAR. And the old gods--

GUNLÖD. I have never been able to believe in them--although my father
commanded me to do so--they are wicked.

GUNNAR. Who has taught you to pray? Who gave you the crucifix?

GUNLÖD. The bishop.

GUNNAR. And that no one knows?

GUNLÖD. No--I have had to lie to my mother and that troubles me.

GUNNAR. And your father hid you here so that the Christians should not
get you?

GUNLÖD. Yes--and now he is expected home from Norway with followers as
he is to be Erl of the island.

GUNNAR. God forbid!

GUNLÖD. Yes--yes--but you must not delay. He is expected home tonight.

GUNNAR. Good--there beyond Hjärleif's headland lies my ship.--Out to
sea! There is a land wind, and before the first cock's crow we shall be
beyond pursuit.

GUNLÖD. Yes! Yes!

GUNNAR. Soon we should be at Ostergötland--where the summer is still
green--and there you shall live in my castle which I have built where
your father's house stood.

GUNLÖD. Does not that still stand?

GUNNAR. No--it was burned.

GUNLÖD. By the Christians?

GUNNAR. You are so passionate, Gunlöd!

GUNLÖD. I suffer to say I would rather be a heathen.

GUNNAR. What are you saying, girl!

GUNLÖD. [After a pause]. Forgive me, forgive me--I am in such a wild
mood--and when I see the Christians, who should be examples, commit such
deeds--

GUNNAR. Crush out that thought, Gunlöd--it is ungodly. Do you see this
wreath?

GUNLÖD. Where did you gather it?

GUNNAR. You recognize the flowers, Gunlöd?

GUNLÖD. They grew in my father's garden--may I keep them?

GUNNAR. Gladly--but, why do you care to have them when we are going to
journey there ourselves?

GUNLÖD. I shall look at them the long winter through--the hemlock shall
remind me of the green woods and the anemones of the blue sky.

GUNNAR. And when they are withered--

GUNLÖD. Of that I do not think.

GUNNAR. Then go with me from this drear land--far away, and there where
our childhood was spent we will live as free as the birds among the
flowers and sunshine. There you shall not go in stealth to the temple of
the Lord when the bells tell you of the Sabbath. Oh, you shall see the
new chapel with its vaulted roof and high pillared aisles. And hear the
acolytes singing when the bishop lights the incense on the high altar.
There shall you solemnize the God service with those of Christ and you
shall feel you heart cleansed of sin.

GUNLÖD. Shall I fly--leave my mother?

GUNNAR. She will forgive you some time.

GUNLÖD. But my father would call me cowardly and that I would never
allow.

GUNNAR. That you must endure for the sake of your belief.

GUNLÖD. Thorfinn's daughter was never cowardly.

GUNNAR. Your father does not love you, and he will hate you when he
knows of your conversion.

GUNLÖD. That he may do--but he shall never despise me.

GUNNAR. You surrender your love, Gunlöd.

GUNLÖD. Love!--I remember--there was a maiden--she had a friend who
went away--after, she was never again glad--she only sat sewing silk and
gold--what she was making no one knew--and when they asked her she
would only weep. And when they asked her why she wept, she never
answered--only wept. She grew pale of cheek and her mother made ready
her shroud.--Then there came an old woman and she said it was love.
Gunnar,--I never wept when you went away as father says it is weak to
shed tears; I never sewed silk and gold for that my mother has never
taught me to do--then had I not love?

GUNNAR. You have often thought of me during these years?

GUNLÖD. I have dreamed so often of you, and this morning when I stood by
the window where I linger so willingly and, gazing over the sea, I saw
your ship come up out of the east, I became unquiet although I did not
know it was your ship.

GUNNAR. Why do you gaze so willingly over the sea?

GUNLÖD. You ask many questions!

GUNNAR. Why did you want to close the door against me?

GUNLÖD. [Silent].

GUNNAR. Why didn't you close it?

GUNLÖD. [Silent].

GUNNAR. Why are you silent?

[Gunlöd bursts into tears.]

GUNNAR. You weep, Gunlöd, and you know why? I know,--you love! [Takes
her in his arms and kisses her.]

GUNLÖD. [Tearing herself away]. You must not kiss me! Go!

GUNNAR. Yes--and you shall go with me.

GUNLÖD. I do not care to be commanded by you--and I shall not obey.

GUNNAR. The volcano gives forth fire--and burns itself out!

GUNLÖD. You have destroyed my peace--forever! Go and let me forget you.

GUNNAR. Do you know what the silver falcon with the ribbon stands for?
It is the symbol of the wild girl I shall tame.

GUNLÖD. [With force]. You! Go before I hate you!--No one yet has bent my
will!

GUNNAR. The wild fire of the viking's blood still burns in your veins,
but it shall be quenched. A day and a night shall I wait for you. And
you will come--mild as a dove seeking shelter, although you now would
fly above the clouds like a wild falcon. But I still hold the ribbon in
my hand--that is your love, which you cannot tear away. When twilight
falls again you will come. Till then, farewell. [Goes to the door and
stops.]

GUNLÖD. [Silent.]

GUNNAR. [Going.] Farewell.

GUNLÖD. We shall see, proud knight, who comes first. When this garland
shall bloom again, then shall I come. [Throws garland in fire. She
watches it burn in a thoughtful mood. When it is quite burnt she breaks
into tears again and falls on her knees.] God! God! Soften my proud
spirit! Oh, that he should leave me! [Hastens to door. At same moment
Valgerd enters, passes Gunlöd, and goes to fire.]

VALGERD. Why did you not tend the fire?

GUNLÖD. [Silent.]

VALGERD [Putting her hand against Gunlöd's heart]. You have a secret!

GUNLÖD. Yes, mother, yes.

VALGERD. Hide it well.

GUNLÖD. Oh, I must speak--I can't bear it any longer.

VALGERD. When saw you a mother who did not know a daughter's secrets?

GUNLÖD. Who told you mine?

VALGERD [Harshly]. Dry your tears.

[A pause.]

GUNLÖD. Oh, let me go out--on the mountains--on the strand. It is so
stifling here.

VALGERD. Go up to the loft--and you can be alone. [Enter a thrall.] What
would you?

THRALL. The Erl's trumpets are heard beyond the rocks and the storm is
growing.

VALGERD. Has darkness fallen?

THRALL. Yes, and a terrible darkness it is.

[A pause.]

GUNLÖD. Send out a boat--two--as many as can be found.

THRALL. All the boats are out for the hunt.

GUNLÖD. Light beacon fires.

THRALL. All the fuel is so rain-soaked that we haven't had so much as a
twig on the hearth all the evening.

VALGERD. Away!

THRALL. How will it go with the Erl?

VALGERD. Does that concern you?

[Thrall goes.]

GUNLÖD. You have not forgotten your wrong!

VALGERD. Nor my revenge! One should not lay hands on the daughter of an
Erl!

GUNLÖD. So be it. Now your moment has come--take your revenge--I'll
show you how--like this. [Takes a lighted torch.] Put this torch in the
window-hole on the right and you wreck him. Put it in the left and you
save him--

VALGERD [Interrupts]. Give me the torch and leave me.

GUNLÖD. There is a sacrifice which can pacify your god's. Sacrifice your
revenge.

VALGERD. [Takes torch, hesitates, and goes quickly to left window-hole
and places it there. Trumpets are heard]. You struck me, Thorfinn--I
swore revenge--I shall humble you with a kind deed.

GUNLÖD [Unseen by Valgerd has entered and falls on her mother's neck].
Thanks, mother.

VALGERD [Disconcerted]. Haven't you gone--

GUNLÖD. Now I shall go. [Gunlöd goes.]

VALGERD [Alone by the window-hole]. You shout for help, you mighty man,
who always helped yourself. [Trumpets are heard.] Where is now your
might--where is your kingdom--[A gust of wind blows out the lighted
torch. Valgerd, terribly frightened, takes torch and lights it.] Oh, he
will perish! What shall I do? Pray? To whom? Odin? Njard? Ogir? I have
called to them for four times ten years, but never have they answered. I
have sacrificed, but never have they helped. Thou, God, however you
may be called--Thou mighty one, who bids the sun to rise and set, thou
tremendous one who rules over the winds and water--to you will I pray,
to you will I sacrifice my revenge if you will save him.

[Orm enters unnoticed.]

ORM. Good evening to you, Valgerd. Put on your cloak--the wind is sharp.

VALGERD [Disconcerted, takes down torch and closes window-hole.]
Welcome, Orm.

ORM. Thanks.

VALGERD. How is it with you, Orm?

ORM. Tolerable enough---when one gets near the big logs.

VALGERD [Irritated]. How went the journey I mean?

ORM. That is a long saga.

VALGERD. Make it short.

ORM. Well, as you know, we fared to Norway, seeking men and timber.

VALGERD. Orm!

ORM. Valgerd!

VALGERD. You have not spoken a word of the Erl.

ORM. Have you asked a word about your mate?

VALGERD. Where is he? Lives he?

ORM. I know not.

VALGERD. You know not!--you, his foster brother? Where did you part from
him?

ORM. Far out in the gulf. It was merry out there you may believe. You
should have seen him swimming with my lyre in his hand. The sea-weed was
so tangled in his beard and hair that one was tempted to believe that it
was Neptune himself. Just then came a wave as big as a house--

VALGERD. And then?

ORM. And then--I saw my lyre no more.

VALGERD. Orm! You jest while your lord and brother is perhaps perishing
out there! I command you--go at once and seek him! Do you hear?

ORM. Why, what is the matter? You were never before so concerned about
your mate! You might find time to give me a drink of ale before I go.

VALGERD. Warm your knees by the hearth. I shall go--and defy wind and
storm.

ORM. [Taking her hounds]. Woman, woman--after all, you are a woman!

VALGERD [Angry]. Let go my hand.

ORM. Now the Erl is saved!

VALGERD. Saved?

ORM. Yes, you have been given back to him--and that is his voice now.
[Goes.]

[Voices of Thorfinn and Orm are heard outside, Thorfinn laughing
loudly.]

VALGERD. The Erl comes--he laughs--that I have never heard before--oh,
there is something terrible approaching! [Wrings her hands.]

[Enter Thorfinn and Orm.]

THORFINN [Laughing]. That was a murderous sight--

ORM. Yes, I promise you!

VALGERD. Welcome home, mate.

THORFINN. Thanks, wife. Have you been out in the rain? Your eyes are
wet.

VALGERD. You are so merry!

THORFINN. Merry? Yes--yes.

VALGERD. What became of your ships?

ORM. They went to the bottom--all but one.

VALGERD [To Thorfinn]. And you can nevertheless be so gay?

THORFINN. Ho! Ho! Timber grows in plenty in the north!

ORM. Now perhaps we might have something life-giving.

THORFINN. Well said! Fetch some ale, wife, and let's be merry.

ORM. And we'll thank the gods who saved us.

THORFINN. When will you ever outgrow those sagas, Orm?

ORM. Why do you force your wife and daughter to believe in them?

THORFINN. Women folk should have gods.

ORM. Whom do you believe helped you out there in the storm?

THORFINN. I helped myself.

ORM. And yet you cried out to Ake-Thor when the big wave swallowed you.

THORFINN. There you lie.

ORM. Orm never lies.

THORFINN. Orm is a poet!

ORM. Thorfinn must have swallowed too much sea water when he cried for
help to have such a bitter tongue.

THORFINN. Take care of your own tongue, Orm.

[Valgerd with drinking horns.]

VALGERD. Here, foster brothers, I drink to your oath of friendship and
better luck for your next voyage.

THORFINN. I forbid you to speak of that again. [They drink. Thorfinn
takes horn hastily from mouth and asks] Where is the child?

VALGERD [Troubled]. She is in the loft.

THORFINN. Call her hither.

VALGERD. She's not well.

THORFINN [Looks sharply at Valgerd]. She shall--come!

VALGERD. You don't mean that.

THORFINN. Did you hear the word?

VALGERD. It is not your last.

THORFINN. A man has but one, though woman must always have the last.

VALGERD [Weakly]. You mock me.

THORFINN. You are angry I believe.

VALGERD. You laugh so much tonight.

[Goes out.]

THORFINN. Orm! A thought comes to me.

ORM. If it's a great one you had better hide it. Great thoughts are
scarce these days.

THORFINN. Did you notice my wife?

ORM. I never notice other men's wives.

THORFINN. How kindly and mild she was.

ORM. She pitied you.

THORFINN. Pitied me?

ORM. Yes, because sorrow that laughs is the laughter of death, she
thought.

THORFINN. Woman cannot think.

ORM. No, not with her head, but with her heart. That's why she has a
smaller head but a bigger breast than we.

THORFINN. Forebodings of evil torture me.

ORM. Poor Thorfinn.

THORFINN. My child! Orm! When she comes do you bid her drink from the
horn to Asa-Odin.

ORM. The fox scents against, the wind. I understand.

THORFINN. Be ready--they come.

ORM. Be not hard with the child, Thorfinn, or you will have me to reckon
with.

[Valgerd and Gunlöd enter. The latter heavy with sleepiness.]

GUNLÖD. Welcome home, father.

THORFINN. Do you speak truthfully?

GUNLÖD. [Silent.]

THORFINN. You are ill, are you not?

GUNLÖD. I am not quite myself.

THORFINN. I fear so.

ORM [Waning a drinking horn over the fire]. Come, Gunlöd, and empty this
sacred horn to Odin who saved your father from shipwreck.

[All empty their horns except Gunlöd.]

THORFINN [Tremblingly]. Drink, Gunlöd.

[Gunlöd throws the horn on floor and goes to Thorfinn and buries her
head in his lap.]

GUNLÖD. Hear me, father. I am a Christian. Do with me what you will--my
soul you cannot destroy. God and the Saints will protect it.

[Thorfinn is beside himself with grief and rage. Rises and pushes Gunlöd
away from him and tries to speak, but words fail him. Sits on his high
bench again in silence. Orm goes to the women and speaks quietly to
them. They go toward door. Suddenly Gunlöd turns.]

GUNLÖD. No! I won't go. I must speak that you, my father, may not go
to the grave with a lie--for your whole life has been a lie! I shall
sacrifice the child's respect--love I have never felt--and prove to you
what terrible guilt you have gathered on your head. Know then, you have
taught me to hate--for when did you ever give me love--you taught me to
fear the great Erl Thorfinn and you have succeeded, because I tremble
before your harshness. I respect your many scars and great deeds, but
you never taught me to love my father. You always thrust me away when
I wanted to come to you--you poisoned my soul and now you see God's
punishment. You have made me a criminal--for such I am at this moment,
but it cannot be otherwise. Why do you hate my belief? Because it is
love and yours is hate! Oh, father, father, I want to kiss the clouds
from your brow. I wanted to caress your white locks and make you forget
the sorrows that whitened them. I wanted to support you when your steps
began to falter--Oh! forget what I have said--open your arms [falls on
her knees] and take me to your heart. Look at me tenderly--just once
before it is too late. Speak one word--[springs to her feet] Oh, your
glance freezes me! You will not! I shall pray for power to love you.
[Bursts into tears and goes out, followed by Valgerd, Orm goes forward
to Thorfinn.]

THORFINN. Sing for me, Orm.

ORM. Orm sings nothing but lies.

THORFINN. Lie then.

ORM. Was the truth so bitter?

THORFINN. What do you say?

ORM. Never mind. You shall hear more from me later.

THORFINN. Orm, you are my friend!

ORM. H'm--of course!

THORFINN. I lack peace.

ORM. There are two ways to gain peace: one is never to do anything one
regrets--the other never to regret anything one does!

THORFINN. But if one has already done what one regrets?

ORM. Thorfinn! That is to say, you regret your harshness toward your
child?

THORFINN [Angry]. I regret nothing. And as far as the child is concerned
you had better hold your tongue!

ORM. Hear you, Thorfinn--have you ever thought about what your life has
been?

THORFINN. Thinking is for old women--doing has been my life.

ORM. What do you intend to do now?

THORFINN. What do I intend to do now?

ORM. Yes.

THORFINN [Shaken, is silent.]

ORM. You see how even a little thought struck you--think then if a big
thought should come. Why don't you dare to look back? Because you are
afraid of the sights you would see.

THORFINN. Let the past remain buried.

ORM. No, I shall tear the corpses from their graves and they shall
stare at you with their empty orbits until you quake with anguish and
fear--and you shall see that with all your strength you were not a man.

THORFINN. What are you saying, madman?

ORM. Yes, shout--you are still a boy. Yes, you--I have seen big, tall
children with bushy beards and gray hairs and crooked backs as well.

THORFINN. Hold your tongue, Orm.

ORM. Shout until the hut trembles--the truth you cannot shout down.

THORFINN. Silence, before I strike you!

ORM. Strike! Strike me to death--tear the tongue out of my mouth--with
copper trumpets shall the truth be blasted into your ears, "Your life
has been a lie."

THORFINN [With repressed anger and pain]. Orm, I beg of you--speak no
more.

ORM. Yes, Thorfinn, I shall speak. Feel how the earth trembles under
you. That means an earthquake! The whole earth trembles these days,
for she is about to give birth. She is to bring forth in dire pain a
glorious hero. Open your eyes and look. Do you see how the east wars
with the west? It is love's first conflict--the new bride trembles under
the elder's embraces, she struggles and suffers--but soon she shall
rejoice, and thousands of torches shall be lighted and radiate peace and
gladness, because he shall be born, the young, the strong, the beautiful
princeling, who shall rule over all peoples and whose sceptre is called
love and whose crown is called light and whose name is the new age!
Thorfinn! do you remember the saga about Thor at Utgorda Loake? He
lifted the cat so high that the trolls turned pale; he drank so deep
from the horn that the trolls trembled--but when the old woman felled
him to his knees then the trolls laughed. It was the age that vanquished
him, and it is the age that you have warred against, and which has slain
you--it is the lord of the age, it is God who has crushed you.

THORFINN. I have never known any god but my own strength, and that god I
believe in!

ORM. You don't know him--you who have so long been lying at feud with
him. It was he who drove you from your native land, and you thought
you were escaping him. It was he who struck your ships to splinters and
swallowed up your treasures and ended your power. It was he who
tore your child from you--and you said you lacked peace! It was
he--[Messenger enters.]

MESSENGER. Are you the Erl Thorfinn.

THORFINN. I am.

MESSENGER. You committed the coast massacre at Reyd-fiord last spring?

THORFINN [Undisturbed]. I did.

MESSENGER. You plundered and burned Hallfred at Thorvalla?

THORFINN. Yes.

MESSENGER. And then you disappeared.

THORFINN [Silent.]

MESSENGER. The Allting has now declared you an outlaw and pronounced you
a felon. Your house is to be burned to the ground, and whomsoever will
may take your life. Your enemies are at hand, therefore fly while there
is yet time--make your escape this night.

[Messenger goes out and there is a long pause.]

ORM. Do you know who that was?

THORFINN. You may well ask that.

ORM. It--was a messenger from that old woman who felled Thor--the age!

THORFINN. You talk like an old woman.

ORM. This age does not want to use force, but you have violated it and
it strikes you.

THORFINN. This age cannot suffer strength, therefore it worships
weakness.

ORM. When you came to this island you swore peace. You have broken your
oath, you have violated your honor, therefore you must die like a felon.

THORFINN. Do you too call me a felon?

ORM. Yes.

THORFINN. Would you dare to break an oath? Would you dare to in called a
felon?

ORM [Silent.]

THORFINN. Poor wretch! It is you who put shackles on me when I want to
fly! Like a snake you coil yourself around my legs. Let go of me!

ORM. We have sworn the oath of foster-brothers.

THORFINN. I break it!

ORM. You cannot.

THORFINN. Then I'll kick you out of the way.

ORM. That will be our death.

THORFINN. Are you a man, Orm?

ORM. I've become a poet only.

THORFINN. Therefore you have become nothing.

ORM. I knew what I wanted, but I could not attain it. You could attain
anything, but did not know what you wanted.

THORFINN. Thanks for your song. Farewell.

ORM. Who will sing your death song?

THORFINN. The ravens no doubt.

ORM. Do you dare to die, Thorfinn?

THORFINN. I dare more! I dare to be forgotten!

ORM. You were always stronger than I. Farewell. We'll meet again. [Orm
goes out.]

THORFINN. Alone! Alone! Alone! [Pause.] I remember one autumn when the
equinoctial storm raged over England's sun my dragon ship was wrecked
and I was tossed up on the rocks alone. Afterward everything grew
calm. Oh, what long days and nights! Only the cloudless sky above
and endlessly the deep blue sea around me. Not a sound of any living
creature! Not even the gulls to wake me with their screeching! Not even
a breeze stirred the waves to lap against the stones. It seemed as if I
myself were dead! Loudly I talked and shouted, but the sound of my voice
frightened me, and thirst bound my tongue. Only the even beat of my
heart in my breast told me that I was alive! But after a moment's
listening I heard it no longer and, trembling, I rose to my feet, and so
it was each time until, senseless, I swooned. When at last I revived I
heard the slow beats of a heart beside me and a deep breathing that was
not mine, and courage revived in my soul. I looked about--it was a
seal seeking rest; it gazed at me with its moist eyes as if filled with
compassion for me. Now I was no longer alone! I stretched out my hand to
caress its rough body; then it fled and I was doubly alone. Again I am
on the rocks! What do I fear? Yes, loneliness! What is loneliness? It
is I, myself! Who am I then to fear myself? Am I not Erl Thorfinn, the
strong, who has bowed thousands of wills to his? Who never asked for
friendship or love but himself bore his own sorrows! No! No! I am
another! And therefore Thorfinn the strong fears Thorfinn the weak!
Who stole my strength? Who struck me down? Was it the sea? Have I not
vanquished the sea three times ten voyages? And it, has defeated me but
once--but then to the death! It was the stronger. It was a God. But who
subdued the sea that lately raged? Who? Who? Who? It was the stronger!
Who are you then, the stronger! Oh, answer, that I may believe! He does
not answer!--All is silent!--Again I hear my heart beating. Oh, help,
help! I am cold, I freeze--[Goes to door and calls Valgerd.]

[Enter a thrall.]

THRALL. You called, Master Erl?

THORFINN [Recovering himself]. You were mistaken.

THRALL. Yes, master.

THORFINN. How many men are we?

THRALL. Oh--half three score I think.

THORFINN. Are you afraid to die, thrall?

THRALL. How can I be when I believe that I shall be saved?

[Crosses himself.]

THORFINN. What does that mean?

THRALL. The bishop has taught us to do that.

THORFINN. I forgot that you are a Christian.

THRALL. Do you wish me to stay in your service when you are a heathen?

THORFINN. I want to prove how little I respect their belief. We must put
double bolts on the north gate!

THRALL. Yes, Master, but the belief is stronger than a hundred bolts.

THORFINN. Who questioned you? [Pause.] What happened when you became
Christians here on the island?

THRALL. Oh, it was easier than any one would think. They only poured
water on us and the bishop read from a big book and then they gave us
each a white shirt.

THORFINN. Tell the twelve strongest to take their new axes--do you hear?

THRALL [Starting to go]. Yes, Master.

THORFINN. Wait. [Pause.] Do you remember what was written in that big
book?

THRALL. I don't remember much of it, but there was something about two
thieves who were hanged on crosses along with the Son of God. But one of
them went to heaven.

THORFINN. Did they pour water on him, too?

THRALL. The bishop didn't say.

THORFINN. Do you know whether there are any horses in the stable?

THRALL. They must be out at pasture--but I'll see. [Starts to go.]

THORFINN. You mustn't leave me--Stay. [Pause.] Could you die in peace
this night?

THRALL. Yes, if I only had time for a prayer first.

THORFINN. Does that bring peace to one?

THRALL. Oh, yes, Master.

THORFINN [Rises, takes up a goblet]. This you shall have if you will
pray for me.

THRALL. That's not enough.

THORFINN. You shall have ten, but if you ever tell of it--I'll take your
life.

THRALL. It would not help even if you gave me a hundred. You must pray
yourself.

THORFINN. I cannot, but I command you to pray.

THRALL. I will obey--but you will see that it does not help. [Praying.]
Jesus Christ, have pity on this poor sinner who begs for mercy.

THORFINN. That's a lie. I never begged for anything!

THRALL. You see now that it doesn't help.

THORFINN. Give me my armor and help me buckle.

THRALL [Helping]. You are not keeping still. I can't fasten the buckles.

THORFINN. Wretch!

THRALL. But your whole body is shaking.

THORFINN. That's a lie!

[Valgerd and Gunlöd enter.]

THRALL. May I go now?

THORFINN. Go.

VALGERD [Coming forward]. You called me.

THORFINN. That's not true.

VALGERD. Your enemies are upon you.

THORFINN. What does that concern you?

VALGRED. Make ready. I have heard what has come to pass.

THORFINN. Then it is best that you [indicating both Valgerd and Gunlöd]
hide yourselves in the cellar passage.

[Another messenger enters.]

MESSENGER. Erl Thorfinn, we are here. Will you surrender to our superior
strength?

THORFINN [Silent.]

MESSENGER. You do not answer. Let the women go as we shall burn your
home. [Thorfinn is silent.] Your answer!

[Gunlöd who has been standing by the door, comes forward and takes a
battle axe from wall.]

GUNLÖD. I give you your answer! Ill must Erl Thorfinn have brought up
his daughter and little would his wife have loved him if they should
desert him now. Here is your answer. [Throws battle axe at messenger's
feet.]

MESSENGER. You are stronger than I thought, Thorfinn. For your
daughter's sake you shall have a chance to fall like a hero and not as a
felon. Make ready for open conflict--out on the field. [Goes out.]

THORFINN [to Valgerd]. Out on you, cowardly, faithless woman, to guard
my treasure so ill! To make my child mine enemy.

GUNLÖD. O, my father, am I your enemy?

THORFINN. You are a Christian; but it is not too late yet. Will you deny
the white Christ?

GUNLÖD. Never! But I will follow you to death.

VALGERD. Thorfinn, you call me cowardly. I can suffer that, but
faithless--there you wrong me. I have not loved you as warmly as
the southern women are said to love, yet have I been faithful to you
throughout life and I have sworn to go with you in death--as is the
ancient custom. [Opens a trap door in floor.] Look, here have I prepared
my grave, here would I die under these smoky beams that have witnessed
my sorrows--and with those [points to the carved images of Thor and Odin
on uprights of high bench] who guided us here. I want to go with the
flames, and in the smoke shall my spirit rise to Ginde to receive
charity and peace.

GUNLÖD. And I to be alone afterward! Oh, let me follow you.

VALGERD. No, child, you are young. You may yet flourish in a milder
clime. But the old fir tree dies on its roots.

GUNLÖD. Father, father, you must not die. I will save you!

THORFINN. You?

GUNLÖD. Your kinsman Gunnar lies off Hjärleif's headland with his men.
Send one of the thralls to him by a roundabout route and he will come.

THORFINN. So! It wax out of that well that you drew your courage. Keep
your help and go if you will.

GUNLÖD. You shall not think me a coward. I go with you, mother. You
cannot hinder me.

[Thorfinn goes to the door, trying to conceal his emotion.]

VALGERD. No! Stay, Thorfinn, and for once bare your big soul that I may
read its dim runics.

THORFINN. If you cannot interpret them now then may this runic stone
crumble to air unread.

VALGERD. You are not the hard stone you would seem. You have feelings.
Show them. Let them flow forth and you shall know peace!

THORFINN. My feelings are my heart's blood. Would you see it?

[The clatter of arms is heard outside which continues until Thorfinn
returns. Thorfinn starts to go out when he hears the chatter.]

VALGERD. Oh, stay and say a word of farewell!

THORFINN. Woman, you tear down my strength with your feelings. Let me
go! The play has begun!

VALGERD. Say farewell, at least.

THORNFINN [Restraining his feelings with effort]. Farewell, child. [Goes
out.]

VALGERD. That man no one will bend.

GUNLÖD. God will!

VALGERD. His hardness is great.

GUNLÖD. God's mercy is greater!

VALGERD. Farewell, my child.

GUNLÖD. Do you dare leave me behind, alone?

VALGERD [Embracing Gunlöd]. Are you prepared?

GUNLÖD. The holy virgin prays for me.

VALGERD. I trust in the God of love.

GUNLÖD. And in the mother of God.

VALGERD. I know her not.

GUNLÖD. You must believe in her.

VALGERD. My belief is not your belief.

GUNLÖD [Embracing Valgerd]. Forgive me.

VALGERD. Now to your place.

[Gunlöd opens the wooden shutter at window-hole and looks out. Valgerd
takes it torch and places herself by the trap door in floor.]

GUNLÖD. The strife is sharp.

VALGERD. Do you see the Erl?

GUNLÖD. He stands at the gate.

VALGERD. How fares he?

GUNLÖD. Everything falls before him.

VALGERD. Does he weary?

GUNLÖD. Still is he straight-- -- --See what terrible northern lights.

VALGERD. Have many fallen?

GUNLÖD. I cannot tell. They are drawing away from the threshing yard.
Oh, the heavens are red as blood!

[Pause.]

VALGERD. Speak! What do you see?

GUNLÖD [With joy]. The silver falcon!

VALGERD. It's an ill-omen.

GUNLÖD. Father comes.

VALGERD. Is he wounded?

GUNLÖD. Oh, now he is falling!

VALGERD. Close the window-hole and trust in God.

GUNLÖD. No, not yet. A moment.

VALGRED. Are you afraid?

GUNLÖD [Going toward door]. No! No!

[The sounds of the conflict gradually die away.]

THORFINN [Comes in pale and wounded.] Stay!

[Valgerd goes towards him. Pause.]

THORFINN [On high bench]. Come here.

[Valgerd and Gunlöd go to him. Thorfinn caresses Gunlöd's hair, kisses
her forehead, then presses Valgerd's hand.]

THORFINN [Kissing Valgerd]. Now you see my heart's blood.

[Valgerd rises to get torch.]

VALGERD. Now is our parting over.

THORFINN. Stay and live with your child.

VALGERD. My oath!

THORFINN. My whole life has been a broken oath and yet I hope-- -- --It
is better to live-- -- --

[Orm comes in wounded. Stops at door.]

ORM. May I come?

THORFINN. Come.

ORM. Have you found peace now?

THORFINN [Caressing the woman]. Soon, soon!

ORM. Then we are ready for the journey.

THORFINN [Looks at Valgerd and Gunlöd]. Not yet.

ORM [Sits on bench]. Hurry if you want company.

THORFINN. Orm, are you a Christian?

ORM. You may ask indeed.

THORFINN. What are you then, riddle?

ORM. I was everything. I was nothing. I was a poet.

THORFINN. Do you believe in anything?

ORM. I've come to have a belief.

THORFINN. What gave it to you?

ORM. Doubt, misfortune, sorrow.

THORFINN [To Valgerd]. Valgerd, give me your hand, so. Hold
fast--tighter--you must not let go until--the end.

[Gunnar comes in and stops by door.]

THORFINN. Who comes?

GUNNAR. You know me!

THORFINN. I know your voice, but my eyes see you not.

GUNNAR. I am your kinsman, Gunnar.

THORFINN [After a pause]. Step forth.

[Gunnar remains where he is, looking questioningly at Gunlöd.]

THORFINN. Is he here?

[Gunlöd rises, goes with slow steps and bowed head to Gunnar. Takes his
hand and leads him to Thorfinn. They kneel.]

THORFINN [Putting hands on their heads]. Eternal -- -- -- Creating -- --
-- God--[Dies.]

CURTAIN.

*****





THE STRONGER


CHARACTERS

     MME. X., an actress, married
     MLLE. Y., an actress, unmarried
     A WAITRESS


[SCENE--The corner of a ladies' cafe. Two little iron tables, a red
velvet sofa, several chairs. Enter Mme. X., dressed in winter clothes,
carrying a Japanese basket on her arm.]

[MLLE. Y. sits with a half empty beer bottle before her, reading an
illustrated paper, which she changes later for another.]

MME. X. Good afternoon, Amelie. You're sitting here alone on Christmas
eve like a poor bachelor!

MLLE. Y. [Looks up, nods, and resumes her reading.]

MME. X. Do you know it really hurts me to see you like this, alone, in a
cafe, and on Christmas eve, too. It makes me feel as I did one time when
I saw a bridal party in a Paris restaurant, and the bride sat reading a
comic paper, while the groom played billiards with the witnesses. Huh,
thought I, with such a beginning, what will follow, and what will be the
end? He played billiards on his wedding eve! [Mlle. Y. starts to speak].
And she read a comic paper, you mean? Well, they are not altogether the
same thing.

[A waitress enters, places a cup of chocolate before Mme. X. and goes
out.]

MME. X. You know what, Amelie! I believe you would have done better to
have kept him! Do you remember, I was the first to say "Forgive him?"
Do you remember that? You would be married now and have a home. Remember
that Christmas when you went out to visit your fiance's parents in the
country? How you gloried in the happiness of home life and really longed
to quit the theatre forever? Yes, Amelie dear, home is the best of all,
the theatre next and children--well, you don't understand that.

MLLE. Y. [Looks up scornfully.]

[Mme. X. sips a few spoonfuls out of the cup, then opens her basket and
shows Christmas presents.]

MME. X. Now you shall see what I bought for my piggywigs. [Takes up a
doll.] Look at this! This is for Lisa, ha! Do you see how she can roll
her eyes and turn her head, eh? And here is Maja's popgun. [Loads it and
shoots at Mlle. Y.]

MLLE. Y. [Makes a startled gesture.]

MME. X. Did I frighten you? Do you think I would like to shoot you, eh?
On my soul, if I don't think you did! If you wanted to shoot _me_ it
wouldn't be so surprising, because I stood in your way--and I know you
can never forget that--although I was absolutely innocent. You still
believe I intrigued and got you out of the Stora theatre, but I didn't.
I didn't do that, although you think so. Well, it doesn't make any
difference what I say to you. You still believe I did it. [Takes up
a pair of embroidered slippers.] And these are for my better half. I
embroidered them myself--I can't bear tulips, but he wants tulips on
everything.

MLLE. Y. [Looks up ironically and curiously.]

MME. X. [Putting a hand in each slipper.] What little feet Bob has!
What? And you should see what a splendid stride he has! You've never
seen him in slippers! [Mlle. Y. laughs aloud.] Look! [She makes the
slippers walk on the table. Mlle. Y. laughs loudly.] And when he is
grumpy he stamps like this with his foot. "What! damn those servants who
can never learn to make coffee. Oh, now those creatures haven't trimmed
the lamp wick properly!" And then there are draughts on the floor and
his feet are cold. "Ugh, how cold it is; the stupid idiots can never
keep the fire going." [She rubs the slippers together, one sole over the
other.]

MLLE. Y. [Shrieks with laughter.]

MME. X. And then he comes home and has to hunt for his slippers which
Marie has stuck under the chiffonier--oh, but it's sinful to sit here
and make fun of one's husband this way when he is kind and a good little
man. You ought to have had such a husband, Amelie. What are you laughing
at? What? What? And you see he's true to me. Yes, I'm sure of that,
because he told me himself--what are you laughing at?--that when I was
touring in Norway that that brazen Frêdêrique came and wanted to seduce
him! Can you fancy anything so infamous? [Pause.] I'd have torn her eyes
out if she had come to see him when I was at home. [Pause.] It was lucky
that Bob told me about it himself and that it didn't reach me through
gossip. [Pause.] But would you believe it, Frêdêrique wasn't the only
one! I don't know why, but the women are crazy about my husband. They
must think he has influence about getting them theatrical engagements,
because he is connected with the government. Perhaps you were after
him yourself. I didn't use to trust you any too much. But now I know
he never bothered his head about you, and you always seemed to have a
grudge against him someway.

[Pause. They look at each other in a puzzled way.]

MME. X. Come and see us this evening, Amelie, and show us that you're
not put out with us,--not put out with me at any rate. I don't know, but
I think it would be uncomfortable to have you for an enemy. Perhaps
it's because I stood in your way [rallentando] or--I really--don't know
why--in particular.

[Pause. Mlle. Y. stares at Mme. X curiously.]

MME. X [Thoughtfully]. Our acquaintance has been so queer. When I saw
you for the first time I was afraid of you, so afraid that I didn't dare
let you out of my sight; no matter when or where, I always found myself
near you--I didn't dare have you for an enemy, so I became your friend.
But there was always discord when you came to our house, because I saw
that my husband couldn't endure you, and the whole thing seemed as awry
to me as an ill-fitting gown--and I did all I could to make him friendly
toward you, but with no success until you became engaged. Then came a
violent friendship between you, so that it looked all at once as though
you both dared show your real feelings only when you were secure--and
then--how was it later? I didn't get jealous--strange to say! And I
remember at the christening, when you acted as godmother, I made him
kiss you--he did so, and you became so confused--as it were; I didn't
notice it then--didn't think about it later, either--have never thought
about it until--now! [Rises suddenly.] Why are you silent? You haven't
said a word this whole time, but you have let me go on talking! You have
sat there, and your eyes have reeled out of me all these thoughts which
lay like raw silk in its cocoon--thoughts--suspicious thoughts, perhaps.
Let me see--why did you break your engagement? Why do you never come to
our house any more? Why won't you come to see us tonight?

[Mlle. Y. appears as if about to speak.]

MME. X. Hush, you needn't speak--I understand it all! It was
because--and because--and because! Yes, yes! Now all the accounts
balance. That's it. Fie, I won't sit at the same table with you. [Moves
her things to another table.] That's the reason I had to embroider
tulips--which I hate--on his slippers, because you are fond of tulips;
that's why [Throws slippers on the floor] we go to Lake Mälarn in the
summer, because you don't like salt water; that's why my boy is named
Eskil--because it's your father's name; that's why I wear your
colors, read your authors, eat your favorite dishes, drink your
drinks--chocolate, for instance; that's why--oh--my God--it's terrible,
when I think about it; it's terrible. Everything, everything came from
you to me, even your passions. Your soul crept into mine, like a worm
into an apple, ate and ate, bored and bored, until nothing was left but
the rind and a little black dust within. I wanted to get away from you,
but I couldn't; you lay like a snake and charmed me with your black
eyes; I felt that when I lifted my wings they only dragged me down; I
lay in the water with bound feet, and the stronger I strove to keep up
the deeper I worked myself down, down, until I sank to the bottom, where
you lay like a giant crab to clutch me in your claws--and there I am
lying now.

I hate you, hate you, hate you! And you only sit there silent--silent
and indifferent; indifferent whether it's new moon or waning moon,
Christmas or New Year's, whether others are happy or unhappy; without
power to hate or to love; as quiet as a stork by a rat hole--you
couldn't scent your prey and capture it, but you could lie in wait for
it! You sit here in your corner of the cafê--did you know it's called
"The Rat Trap" for you?--and read the papers to see if misfortune hasn't
befallen some one, to see if some one hasn't been given notice at the
theatre, perhaps; you sit here and calculate about your next victim and
reckon on your chances of recompense like a pilot in a shipwreck.
Poor Amelie, I pity you, nevertheless, because I know you are unhappy,
unhappy like one who has been wounded, and angry because you are
wounded. I can't be angry with you, no matter how much I want to
be--because you come out the weaker one. Yes, all that with Bob doesn't
trouble me. What is that to me, after all? And what difference does it
make whether I learned to drink chocolate from you or some one else.
[Sips a spoonful from her cup.]

Besides, chocolate is very healthful. And if you taught me how to
dress--tant mieux!--that has only made me more attractive to my husband;
so you lost and I won there. Well, judging by certain signs, I believe
you have already lost him; and you certainly intended that I should
leave him--do as you did with your fiancê and regret as you now regret;
but, you see, I don't do that--we mustn't be too exacting. And why
should I take only what no one else wants?

Perhaps, take it all in all, I am at this moment the stronger one. You
received nothing from me, but you gave me much. And now I seem like a
thief since you have awakened and find I possess what is your loss. How
could it be otherwise when everything is worthless and sterile in
your hands? You can never keep a man's love with your tulips and your
passions--but I can keep it. You can't learn how to live from your
authors, as I have learned. You have no little Eskil to cherish, even
if your father's name was Eskil. And why are you always silent, silent,
silent? I thought that was strength, but perhaps it is because you have
nothing to say! Because you never think about anything! [Rises and picks
up slippers.]

Now I'm going home--and take the tulips with me--_your_ tulips! You are
unable to learn from another; you can't bend--therefore, you broke like
a dry stalk. But I won't break! Thank you, Amelie, for all your good
lessons. Thanks for teaching my husband how to love. Now I'm going home
to love him. [Goes.]

A TRAGICOMEDY

1889




PERSONS


TEKLA

ADOLPH, her husband, a painter

GUSTAV, her divorced husband, a high-school teacher (who is travelling
under an assumed name)




SCENE

(A parlor in a summer hotel on the sea-shore. The rear wall has a door
opening on a veranda, beyond which is seen a landscape. To the right of
the door stands a table with newspapers on it. There is a chair on the
left side of the stage. To the right of the table stands a sofa. A door
on the right leads to an adjoining room.)


(ADOLPH and GUSTAV, the latter seated on the sofa by the table to the
right.)

ADOLPH. [At work on a wax figure on a miniature modelling stand; his
crutches are placed beside him]--and for all this I have to thank you!

GUSTAV. [Smoking a cigar] Oh, nonsense!

ADOLPH. Why, certainly! During the first days after my wife had gone,
I lay helpless on a sofa and did nothing but long for her. It was as if
she had taken away my crutches with her, so that I couldn't move from
the spot. When I had slept a couple of days, I seemed to come to, and
began to pull myself together. My head calmed down after having been
working feverishly. Old thoughts from days gone by bobbed up again.
The desire to work and the instinct for creation came back. My eyes
recovered their faculty of quick and straight vision--and then you
showed up.

GUSTAV. I admit you were in a miserable condition when I first met you,
and you had to use your crutches when you walked, but this is not to say
that my presence has been the cause of your recovery. You needed a rest,
and you had a craving for masculine company.

ADOLPH. Oh, that's true enough, like everything you say. Once I used to
have men for friends, but I thought them superfluous after I married,
and I felt quite satisfied with the one I had chosen. Later I was
drawn into new circles and made a lot of acquaintances, but my wife
was jealous of them--she wanted to keep me to herself: worse still--she
wanted also to keep my friends to herself. And so I was left alone with
my own jealousy.

GUSTAV. Yes, you have a strong tendency toward that kind of disease.

ADOLPH. I was afraid of losing her--and I tried to prevent it. There
is nothing strange in that. But I was never afraid that she might be
deceiving me--

GUSTAV. No, that's what married men are never afraid of.

ADOLPH. Yes, isn't it queer? What I really feared was that her friends
would get such an influence over her that they would begin to exercise
some kind of indirect power over me--and THAT is something I couldn't
bear.

GUSTAV. So your ideas don't agree--yours and your wife's?

ADOLPH. Seeing that you have heard so much already, I may as well tell
you everything. My wife has an independent nature--what are you smiling
at?

GUSTAV. Go on! She has an independent nature--

ADOLPH. Which cannot accept anything from me--

GUSTAV. But from everybody else.

ADOLPH. [After a pause] Yes.--And it looked as if she especially hated
my ideas because they were mine, and not because there was anything
wrong about them. For it used to happen quite often that she advanced
ideas that had once been mine, and that she stood up for them as her
own. Yes, it even happened that friends of mine gave her ideas which
they had taken directly from me, and then they seemed all right.
Everything was all right except what came from me.

GUSTAV. Which means that you are not entirely happy?

ADOLPH. Oh yes, I am happy. I have the one I wanted, and I have never
wanted anybody else.

GUSTAV. And you have never wanted to be free?

ADOLPH. No, I can't say that I have. Oh, well, sometimes I have imagined
that it might seem like a rest to be free. But the moment she leaves me,
I begin to long for her--long for her as for my own arms and legs. It
is queer that sometimes I have a feeling that she is nothing in herself,
but only a part of myself--an organ that can take away with it my will,
my very desire to live. It seems almost as if I had deposited with her
that centre of vitality of which the anatomical books tell us.

GUSTAV. Perhaps, when we get to the bottom of it, that is just what has
happened.

ADOLPH. How could it be so? Is she not an independent being, with
thoughts of her own? And when I met her I was nothing--a child of an
artist whom she undertook to educate.

GUSTAV. But later you developed her thoughts and educated her, didn't
you?

ADOLPH. No, she stopped growing and I pushed on.

GUSTAV. Yes, isn't it strange that her "authoring" seemed to fall off
after her first book--or that it failed to improve, at least? But that
first time she had a subject which wrote itself--for I understand she
used her former husband for a model. You never knew him, did you? They
say he was an idiot.

ADOLPH. I never knew him, as he was away for six months at a time. But
he must have been an arch-idiot, judging by her picture of him. [Pause]
And you may feel sure that the picture was correct.

GUSTAV. I do!--But why did she ever take him?

ADOLPH. Because she didn't know him well enough. Of course, you never DO
get acquainted until afterward!

GUSTAV. And for that reason one ought not to marry
until--afterward.--And he was a tyrant, of course?

ADOLPH. Of course?

GUSTAV. Why, so are all married men. [Feeling his way] And you not the
least.

ADOLPH. I? Who let my wife come and go as she pleases--

GUSTAV. Well, that's nothing. You couldn't lock her up, could you? But
do you like her to stay away whole nights?

ADOLPH. No, really, I don't.

GUSTAV. There, you see! [With a change of tactics] And to tell the
truth, it would only make you ridiculous to like it.

ADOLPH. Ridiculous? Can a man be ridiculous because he trusts his wife?

GUSTAV. Of course he can. And it's just what you are already--and
thoroughly at that!

ADOLPH. [Convulsively] I! It's what I dread most of all--and there's
going to be a change.

GUSTAV. Don't get excited now--or you'll have another attack.

ADOLPH. But why isn't she ridiculous when I stay out all night?

GUSTAV. Yes, why? Well, it's nothing that concerns you, but that's the
way it is. And while you are trying to figure out why, the mishap has
already occurred.

ADOLPH. What mishap?

GUSTAV. However, the first husband was a tyrant, and she took him
only to get her freedom. You see, a girl cannot have freedom except by
providing herself with a chaperon--or what we call a husband.

ADOLPH. Of course not.

GUSTAV. And now you are the chaperon.

ADOLPH. I?

GUSTAV. Since you are her husband.

(ADOLPH keeps a preoccupied silence.)

GUSTAV. Am I not right?

ADOLPH. [Uneasily] I don't know. You live with a woman for years,
and you never stop to analyse her, or your relationship with her, and
then--then you begin to think--and there you are!--Gustav, you are my
friend. The only male friend I have. During this last week you have
given me courage to live again. It is as if your own magnetism had been
poured into me. Like a watchmaker, you have fixed the works in my head
and wound up the spring again. Can't you hear, yourself, how I think
more clearly and speak more to the point? And to myself at least it
seems as if my voice had recovered its ring.

GUSTAV. So it seems to me also. And why is that?

ADOLPH. I shouldn't wonder if you grew accustomed to lower your voice in
talking to women. I know at least that Tekla always used to accuse me of
shouting.

GUSTAV. And so you toned down your voice and accepted the rule of the
slipper?

ADOLPH. That isn't quite the way to put it. [After some reflection]
I think it is even worse than that. But let us talk of something
else!--What was I saying?--Yes, you came here, and you enabled me to
see my art in its true light. Of course, for some time I had noticed my
growing lack of interest in painting, as it didn't seem to offer me the
proper medium for the expression of what I wanted to bring out. But when
you explained all this to me, and made it clear why painting must fail
as a timely outlet for the creative instinct, then I saw the light at
last--and I realised that hereafter it would not be possible for me to
express myself by means of colour only.

GUSTAV. Are you quite sure now that you cannot go on painting--that you
may not have a relapse?

ADOLPH. Perfectly sure! For I have tested myself. When I went to bed
that night after our talk, I rehearsed your argument point by point, and
I knew you had it right. But when I woke up from a good night's sleep
and my head was clear again, then it came over me in a flash that you
might be mistaken after all. And I jumped out of bed and got hold of
my brushes and paints--but it was no use! Every trace of illusion was
gone--it was nothing but smears of paint, and I quaked at the thought of
having believed, and having made others believe, that a painted canvas
could be anything but a painted canvas. The veil had fallen from my
eyes, and it was just as impossible for me to paint any more as it was
to become a child again.

GUSTAV. And then you saw that the realistic tendency of our day, its
craving for actuality and tangibility, could only find its proper form
in sculpture, which gives you body, extension in all three dimensions--

ADOLPH. [Vaguely] The three dimensions--oh yes, body, in a word!

GUSTAV. And then you became a sculptor yourself. Or rather, you have
been one all your life, but you had gone astray, and nothing was needed
but a guide to put you on the right road--Tell me, do you experience
supreme joy now when you are at work?

ADOLPH. Now I am living!

GUSTAV. May I see what you are doing?

ADOLPH. A female figure.

GUSTAV. Without a model? And so lifelike at that!

ADOLPH. [Apathetically] Yes, but it resembles somebody. It is remarkable
that this woman seems to have become a part of my body as I of hers.

GUSTAV. Well, that's not so very remarkable. Do you know what
transfusion is?

ADOLPH. Of blood? Yes.

GUSTAV. And you seem to have bled yourself a little too much. When
I look at the figure here I comprehend several things which I merely
guessed before. You have loved her tremendously!

ADOLPH. Yes, to such an extent that I couldn't tell whether she was I or
I she. When she is smiling, I smile also. When she is weeping, I weep.
And when she--can you imagine anything like it?--when she was giving
life to our child--I felt the birth pangs within myself.

GUSTAV. Do you know, my dear friend--I hate to speak of it, but you are
already showing the first symptoms of epilepsy.

ADOLPH. [Agitated] I! How can you tell?

GUSTAV. Because I have watched the symptoms in a younger brother of mine
who had been worshipping Venus a little too excessively.

ADOLPH. How--how did it show itself--that thing you spoke of?

[During the following passage GUSTAV speaks with great animation, and
ADOLPH listens so intently that, unconsciously, he imitates many of
GUSTAV'S gestures.]

GUSTAV. It was dreadful to witness, and if you don't feel strong enough
I won't inflict a description of it on you.

ADOLPH. [Nervously] Yes, go right on--just go on!

GUSTAV. Well, the boy happened to marry an innocent little creature with
curls, and eyes like a turtle-dove; with the face of a child and the
pure soul of an angel. But nevertheless she managed to usurp the male
prerogative--

ADOLPH. What is that?

GUSTAV. Initiative, of course. And with the result that the angel nearly
carried him off to heaven. But first he had to be put on the cross and
made to feel the nails in his flesh. It was horrible!

ADOLPH. [Breathlessly] Well, what happened?

GUSTAV. [Lingering on each word] We might be sitting together talking,
he and I--and when I had been speaking for a while his face would turn
white as chalk, his arms and legs would grow stiff, and his thumbs
became twisted against the palms of his hands--like this. [He
illustrates the movement and it is imitated by ADOLPH] Then his eyes
became bloodshot, and he began to chew--like this. [He chews, and again
ADOLPH imitates him] The saliva was rattling in his throat. His chest
was squeezed together as if it had been closed in a vice. The pupils
of his eyes flickered like gas-jets. His tongue beat the saliva into a
lather, and he sank--slowly--down--backward--into the chair--as if he
were drowning. And then---

ADOLPH. [In a whisper] Stop now!

GUSTAV. And then--Are you not feeling well?

ADOLPH. No.

GUSTAV. [Gets a glass of water for him] There: drink now. And we'll talk
of something else.

ADOLPH. [Feebly] Thank you! Please go on!

GUSTAV. Well--when he came to he couldn't remember anything at all. He
had simply lost consciousness. Has that ever happened to you?

ADOLPH. Yes, I have had attacks of vertigo now and then, but my
physician says it's only anaemia.

GUSTAV. Well, that's the beginning of it, you know. But, believe me, it
will end in epilepsy if you don't take care of yourself.

ADOLPH. What can I do?

GUSTAV. To begin with, you will have to observe complete abstinence.

ADOLPH. For how long?

GUSTAV. For half a year at least.

ADOLPH. I cannot do it. That would upset our married life.

GUSTAV. Good-bye to you then!

ADOLPH. [Covers up the wax figure] I cannot do it!

GUSTAV. Can you not save your own life?--But tell me, as you have
already given me so much of your confidence--is there no other canker,
no secret wound, that troubles you? For it is very rare to find only
one cause of discord, as life is so full of variety and so fruitful in
chances for false relationships. Is there not a corpse in your cargo
that you are trying to hide from yourself?--For instance, you said a
minute ago that you have a child which has been left in other people's
care. Why don't you keep it with you?

ADOLPH. My wife doesn't want us to do so.

GUSTAV. And her reason? Speak up now!

ADOLPH. Because, when it was about three years old, it began to look
like him, her former husband.

GUSTAV. Well? Have you seen her former husband?

ADOLPH. No, never. I have only had a casual glance at a very poor
portrait of him, and then I couldn't detect the slightest resemblance.

GUSTAV. Oh, portraits are never like the original, and, besides, he
might have changed considerably since it was made. However, I hope it
hasn't aroused any suspicions in you?

ADOLPH. Not at all. The child was born a year after our marriage, and
the husband was abroad when I first met Tekla--it happened right here,
in this very house even, and that's why we come here every summer.

GUSTAV. No, then there can be no cause for suspicion. And you wouldn't
have had any reason to trouble yourself anyhow, for the children of a
widow who marries again often show a likeness to her dead husband. It
is annoying, of course, and that's why they used to burn all widows in
India, as you know.--But tell me: have you ever felt jealous of him--of
his memory? Would it not sicken you to meet him on a walk and hear him,
with his eyes on your Tekla, use the word "we" instead of "I"?--We!

ADOLPH. I cannot deny that I have been pursued by that very thought.

GUSTAV. There now!--And you'll never get rid of it. There are discords
in this life which can never be reduced to harmony. For this reason you
had better put wax in your ears and go to work. If you work, and grow
old, and pile masses of new impressions on the hatches, then the corpse
will stay quiet in the hold.

ADOLPH. Pardon me for interrupting you, but--it is wonderful how you
resemble Tekla now and then while you are talking. You have a way of
blinking one eye as if you were taking aim with a gun, and your eyes
have the same influence on me as hers have at times.

GUSTAV. No, really?

ADOLPH. And now you said that "no, really" in the same indifferent
way that she does. She also has the habit of saying "no, really" quite
often.

GUSTAV. Perhaps we are distantly related, seeing that all human beings
are said to be of one family. At any rate, it will be interesting to
make your wife's acquaintance to see if what you say is true.

ADOLPH. And do you know, she never takes an expression from me. She
seems rather to avoid my vocabulary, and I have never caught her using
any of my gestures. And yet people as a rule develop what is called
"marital resemblance."

GUSTAV. And do you know why this has not happened in your case?--That
woman has never loved you.

ADOLPH. What do you mean?

GUSTAV. I hope you will excuse what I am saying--but woman's love
consists in taking, in receiving, and one from whom she takes nothing
does not have her love. She has never loved you!

ADOLPH. Don't you think her capable of loving more than once?

GUSTAV. No, for we cannot be deceived more than once. Then our eyes are
opened once for all. You have never been deceived, and so you had better
beware of those that have. They are dangerous, I tell you.

ADOLPH. Your words pierce me like knife thrusts, and I fool as if
something were being severed within me, but I cannot help it. And this
cutting brings a certain relief, too. For it means the pricking of
ulcers that never seemed to ripen.--She has never loved me!--Why, then,
did she ever take me?

GUSTAV. Tell me first how she came to take you, and whether it was you
who took her or she who took you?

ADOLPH. Heaven only knows if I can tell at all!--How did it happen?
Well, it didn't come about in one day.

GUSTAV. Would you like to have me tell you how it did happen?

ADOLPH. That's more than you can do.

GUSTAV. Oh, by using the information about yourself and your wife that
you have given me, I think I can reconstruct the whole event. Listen
now, and you'll hear. [In a dispassionate tone, almost humorously]
The husband had gone abroad to study, and she was alone. At first her
freedom seemed rather pleasant. Then came a sense of vacancy, for
I presume she was pretty empty when she had lived by herself for a
fortnight. Then he appeared, and by and by the vacancy was filled up. By
comparison the absent one seemed to fade out, and for the simple reason
that he was at a distance--you know the law about the square of the
distance? But when they felt their passions stirring, then came fear--of
themselves, of their consciences, of him. For protection they played
brother and sister. And the more their feelings smacked of the flesh,
the more they tried to make their relationship appear spiritual.

ADOLPH. Brother and sister? How could you know that?

GUSTAV. I guessed it. Children are in the habit of playing papa and
mamma, but when they grow up they play brother and sister--in order to
hide what should be hidden!--And then they took the vow of chastity--and
then they played hide-and-seek--until they got in a dark corner where
they were sure of not being seen by anybody. [With mock severity] But
they felt that there was ONE whose eye reached them in the darkness--and
they grew frightened--and their fright raised the spectre of the
absent one--his figure began to assume immense proportions--it became
metamorphosed: turned into a nightmare that disturbed their amorous
slumbers; a creditor who knocked at all doors. Then they saw his black
hand between their own as these sneaked toward each other across the
table; and they heard his grating voice through that stillness of the
night that should have been broken only by the beating of their own
pulses. He did not prevent them from possessing each other but he
spoiled their happiness. And when they became aware of his invisible
interference with their happiness; when they took flight at last--a vain
flight from the memories that pursued them, from the liability they had
left behind, from the public opinion they could not face--and when they
found themselves without the strength needed to carry their own
guilt, then they had to send out into the fields for a scapegoat to be
sacrificed. They were free-thinkers, but they did not have the courage
to step forward and speak openly to him the words: "We love each
other!" To sum it up, they were cowards, and so the tyrant had to be
slaughtered. Is that right?

ADOLPH. Yes, but you forget that she educated me, that she filled my
head with new thoughts--

GUSTAV. I have not forgotten it. But tell me: why could she not educate
the other man also--into a free-thinker?

ADOLPH. Oh, he was an idiot!

GUSTAV. Oh, of course--he was an idiot! But that's rather an ambiguous
term, and, as pictured in her novel, his idiocy seems mainly to have
consisted in failure to understand her. Pardon me a question: but is
your wife so very profound after all? I have discovered nothing profound
in her writings.

ADOLPH. Neither have I.--But then I have also to confess a certain
difficulty in understanding her. It is as if the cogs of our brain
wheels didn't fit into each other, and as if something went to pieces in
my head when I try to comprehend her.

GUSTAV. Maybe you are an idiot, too?

ADOLPH. I don't THINK so! And it seems to me all the time as if she were
in the wrong--Would you care to read this letter, for instance, which I
got today?

[Takes out a letter from his pocket-book.]

GUSTAV. [Glancing through the letter] Hm! The handwriting seems
strangely familiar.

ADOLPH. Rather masculine, don't you think?

GUSTAV. Well, I know at least ONE man who writes that kind of hand--She
addresses you as "brother." Are you still playing comedy to each other?
And do you never permit yourselves any greater familiarity in speaking
to each other?

ADOLPH. No, it seems to me that all mutual respect is lost in that way.

GUSTAV. And is it to make you respect her that she calls herself your
sister?

ADOLPH. I want to respect her more than myself. I want her to be the
better part of my own self.

GUSTAV. Why don't you be that better part yourself? Would it be less
convenient than to permit somebody else to fill the part? Do you want to
place yourself beneath your wife?

ADOLPH. Yes, I do. I take a pleasure in never quite reaching up to her.
I have taught her to swim, for example, and now I enjoy hearing her
boast that she surpasses me both in skill and daring. To begin with, I
merely pretended to be awkward and timid in order to raise her courage.
And so it ended with my actually being her inferior, more of a coward
than she. It almost seemed to me as if she had actually taken my courage
away from me.

GUSTAV. Have you taught her anything else?

ADOLPH. Yes--but it must stay between us--I have taught her how to
spell, which she didn't know before. But now, listen: when she took
charge of our domestic correspondence, I grew out of the habit of
writing. And think of it: as the years passed on, lack of practice made
me forget a little here and there of my grammar. But do you think she
recalls that I was the one who taught her at the start? No--and so I am
"the idiot," of course.

GUSTAV. So you are an idiot already?

ADOLPH. Oh, it's just a joke, of course!

GUSTAV. Of course! But this is clear cannibalism, I think. Do you know
what's behind that sort of practice? The savages eat their enemies in
order to acquire their useful qualities. And this woman has been eating
your soul, your courage, your knowledge---

ADOLPH. And my faith! It was I who urged her to write her first book---

GUSTAV. [Making a face] Oh-h-h!

ADOLPH. It was I who praised her, even when I found her stuff rather
poor. It was I who brought her into literary circles where she could
gather honey from our most ornamental literary flowers. It was I who
used my personal influence to keep the critics from her throat. It was I
who blew her faith in herself into flame; blew on it until I lost my own
breath. I gave, gave, gave--until I had nothing left for myself. Do you
know--I'll tell you everything now--do you know I really believe--and
the human soul is so peculiarly constituted--I believe that when my
artistic successes seemed about to put her in the shadow--as well as her
reputation--then I tried to put courage into her by belittling myself,
and by making my own art seem inferior to hers. I talked so long about
the insignificant part played by painting on the whole--talked so long
about it, and invented so many reasons to prove what I said, that one
fine day I found myself convinced of its futility. So all you had to do
was to breathe on a house of cards.

GUSTAV. Pardon me for recalling what you said at the beginning of our
talk--that she had never taken anything from you.

ADOLPH. She doesn't nowadays. Because there is nothing more to take.

GUSTAV. The snake being full, it vomits now.

ADOLPH. Perhaps she has been taking a good deal more from me than I have
been aware of?

GUSTAV. You can be sure of that. She took when you were not looking, and
that is called theft.

ADOLPH. Perhaps she never did educate me?

GUSTAV. But you her? In all likelihood! But it was her trick to make it
appear the other way to you. May I ask how she set about educating you?

ADOLPH. Oh, first of all--hm!

GUSTAV. Well?

ADOLPH. Well, I---

GUSTAV. No, we were speaking of her.

ADOLPH. Really, I cannot tell now.

GUSTAV. Do you see!

ADOLPH. However--she devoured my faith also, and so I sank further and
further down, until you came along and gave me a new faith.

GUSTAV. [Smiling] In sculpture?

ADOLPH. [Doubtfully] Yes.

GUSTAV. And have you really faith in it? In this abstract, antiquated
art that dates back to the childhood of civilisation? Do you
believe that you can obtain your effect by pure form--by the three
dimensions--tell me? That you can reach the practical mind of our own
day, and convey an illusion to it, without the use of colour--without
colour, mind you--do you really believe that?

ADOLPH. [Crushed] No!

GUSTAV. Well, I don't either.

ADOLPH. Why, then, did you say you did?

GUSTAV. Because I pitied you.

ADOLPH. Yes, I am to be pitied! For now I am bankrupt! Finished!--And
worst of all: not even she is left to me!

GUSTAV. Well, what could you do with her?

ADOLPH. Oh, she would be to me what God was before I became an atheist:
an object that might help me to exercise my sense of veneration.

GUSTAV. Bury your sense of veneration and let something else grow on top
of it. A little wholesome scorn, for instance.

ADOLPH. I cannot live without having something to respect---

GUSTAV. Slave!

ADOLPH.--without a woman to respect and worship!

GUSTAV. Oh, HELL! Then you had better take back your God--if you needs
must have something to kow-tow to! You're a fine atheist, with all that
superstition about woman still in you! You're a fine free-thinker,
who dare not think freely about the dear ladies! Do you know what that
incomprehensible, sphinx-like, profound something in your wife really
is? It is sheer stupidity!--Look here: she cannot even distinguish
between th and t. And that, you know, means there is something
wrong with the mechanism. When you look at the case, it looks like
a chronometer, but the works inside are those of an ordinary cheap
watch.--Nothing but the skirts-that's all! Put trousers on her, give
her a pair of moustaches of soot under her nose, then take a good,
sober look at her, and listen to her in the same manner: you'll find
the instrument has another sound to it. A phonograph, and nothing
else--giving you back your own words, or those of other people--and
always in diluted form. Have you ever looked at a naked woman--oh yes,
yes, of course! A youth with over-developed breasts; an under-developed
man; a child that has shot up to full height and then stopped growing in
other respects; one who is chronically anaemic: what can you expect of
such a creature?

ADOLPH. Supposing all that to be true--how can it be possible that I
still think her my equal?

GUSTAV. Hallucination--the hypnotising power of skirts! Or--the two
of you may actually have become equals. The levelling process has been
finished. Her capillarity has brought the water in both tubes to the
same height.--Tell me [taking out his watch]: our talk has now lasted
six hours, and your wife ought soon to be here. Don't you think we had
better stop, so that you can get a rest?

ADOLPH. No, don't leave me! I don't dare to be alone!

GUSTAV. Oh, for a little while only--and then the lady will come.

ADOLPH. Yes, she is coming!--It's all so queer! I long for her, but I
am afraid of her. She pets me, she is tender to me, but there is
suffocation in her kisses--something that pulls and numbs. And I feel
like a circus child that is being pinched by the clown in order that it
may look rosy-cheeked when it appears before the public.

GUSTAV. I feel very sorry for you, my friend. Without being a physician,
I can tell that you are a dying man. It is enough to look at your latest
pictures in order to see that.

ADOLPH. You think so? How can you see it?

GUSTAV. Your colour is watery blue, anaemic, thin, so that the
cadaverous yellow of the canvas shines through. And it impresses me as
if your own hollow, putty-coloured checks were showing beneath--

ADOLPH. Oh, stop, stop!

GUSTAV. Well, this is not only my personal opinion. Have you read
to-day's paper?

ADOLPH. [Shrinking] No!

GUSTAV. It's on the table here.

ADOLPH. [Reaching for the paper without daring to take hold of it] Do
they speak of it there?

GUSTAV. Read it--or do you want me to read it to you?

ADOLPH. No!

GUSTAV. I'll leave you, if you want me to.

ADOLPH. No, no, no!--I don't know--it seems as if I were beginning to
hate you, and yet I cannot let you go.--You drag me out of the hole into
which I have fallen, but no sooner do you get me on firm ice, than you
knock me on the head and shove me into the water again. As long as my
secrets were my own, I had still something left within me, but now I am
quite empty. There is a canvas by an Italian master, showing a scene of
torture--a saint whose intestines are being torn out of him and rolled
on the axle of a windlass. The martyr is watching himself grow thinner
and thinner, while the roll on the axle grows thicker.--Now it seems to
me as if you had swelled out since you began to dig in me; and when you
leave, you'll carry away my vitals with you, and leave nothing but an
empty shell behind.

GUSTAV. How you do let your fancy run away with you!--And besides, your
wife is bringing back your heart.

ADOLPH. No, not since you have burned her to ashes. Everything is in
ashes where you have passed along: my art, my love, my hope, my faith!

GUSTAV. All of it was pretty nearly finished before I came along.

ADOLPH. Yes, but it might have been saved. Now it's too
late--incendiary!

GUSTAV. We have cleared some ground only. Now we'll sow in the ashes.

ADOLPH. I hate you! I curse you!

GUSTAV. Good symptoms! There is still some strength left in you. And now
I'll pull you up on the ice again. Listen now! Do you want to listen to
me, and do you want to obey me?

ADOLPH. Do with me what you will--I'll obey you!

GUSTAV. [Rising] Look at me!

ADOLPH. [Looking at GUSTAV] Now you are looking at me again with that
other pair of eyes which attracts me.

GUSTAV. And listen to me!

ADOLPH. Yes, but speak of yourself. Don't talk of me any longer: I am
like an open wound and cannot bear being touched.

GUSTAV. No, there is nothing to say about me. I am a teacher of dead
languages, and a widower--that's all! Take my hand.

ADOLPH. What terrible power there must be in you! It feels as if I were
touching an electrical generator.

GUSTAV. And bear in mind that I have been as weak as you are now.--Stand
up!

ADOLPH. [Rises, but keeps himself from falling only by throwing his arms
around the neck of GUSTAV] I am like a boneless baby, and my brain seems
to lie bare.

GUSTAV. Take a turn across the floor!

ADOLPH. I cannot!

GUSTAV. Do what I say, or I'll strike you!

ADOLPH. [Straightening himself up] What are you saying?

GUSTAV. I'll strike you, I said.

ADOLPH. [Leaping backward in a rage] You!

GUSTAV. That's it! Now you have got the blood into your head, and your
self-assurance is awake. And now I'll give you some electriticy: where
is your wife?

ADOLPH. Where is she?

GUSTAV. Yes.

ADOLPH. She is--at--a meeting.

GUSTAV. Sure?

ADOLPH. Absolutely!

GUSTAV. What kind of meeting?

ADOLPH. Oh, something relating to an orphan asylum.

GUSTAV. Did you part as friends?

ADOLPH. [With some hesitation] Not as friends.

GUSTAV. As enemies then!--What did you say that provoked her?

ADOLPH. You are terrible. I am afraid of you. How could you know?

GUSTAV. It's very simple: I possess three known factors, and with their
help I figure out the unknown one. What did you say to her?

ADOLPH. I said--two words only, but they were dreadful, and I regret
them--regret them very much.

GUSTAV. Don't do it! Tell me now?

ADOLPH. I said: "Old flirt!"

GUSTAV. What more did you say?

ADOLPH. Nothing at all.

GUSTAV. Yes, you did, but you have forgotten it--perhaps because you
don't dare remember it. You have put it away in a secret drawer, but you
have got to open it now!

ADOLPH. I can't remember!

GUSTAV. But I know. This is what you said: "You ought to be ashamed of
flirting when you are too old to have any more lovers!"

ADOLPH. Did I say that? I must have said it!--But how can you know that
I did?

GUSTAV. I heard her tell the story on board the boat as I came here.

ADOLPH. To whom?

GUSTAV. To four young men who formed her company. She is already
developing a taste for chaste young men, just like--

ADOLPH. But there is nothing wrong in that?

GUSTAV. No more than in playing brother and sister when you are papa and
mamma.

ADOLPH. So you have seen her then?

GUSTAV. Yes, I have. But you have never seen her when you didn't--I
mean, when you were not present. And there's the reason, you see, why a
husband can never really know his wife. Have you a portrait of her?

(Adolph takes a photograph from his pocketbook. There is a look of
aroused curiosity on his face.)

GUSTAV. You were not present when this was taken?

ADOLPH. No.

GUSTAV. Look at it. Does it bear much resemblance to the portrait
you painted of her? Hardly any! The features are the same, but the
expression is quite different. But you don't see this, because your own
picture of her creeps in between your eyes and this one. Look at it now
as a painter, without giving a thought to the original. What does
it represent? Nothing, so far as I can see, but an affected coquette
inviting somebody to come and play with her. Do you notice this cynical
line around the mouth which you are never allowed to see? Can you see
that her eyes are seeking out some man who is not you? Do you observe
that her dress is cut low at the neck, that her hair is done up in a
different way, that her sleeve has managed to slip back from her arm?
Can you see?

ADOLPH. Yes--now I see.

GUSTAV. Look out, my boy!

ADOLPH. For what?

GUSTAV. For her revenge! Bear in mind that when you said she could not
attract a man, you struck at what to her is most sacred--the one
thing above all others. If you had told her that she wrote nothing
but nonsense, she would have laughed at your poor taste. But as it
is--believe me, it will not be her fault if her desire for revenge has
not already been satisfied.

ADOLPH. I must know if it is so!

GUSTAV. Find out!

ADOLPH. Find out?

GUSTAV. Watch--I'll assist you, if you want me to.

ADOLPH. As I am to die anyhow--it may as well come first as last! What
am I to do?

GUSTAV. First of all a piece of information: has your wife any
vulnerable point?

ADOLPH. Hardly! I think she must have nine lives, like a cat.

GUSTAV. There--that was the boat whistling at the landing--now she'll
soon be here.

ADOLPH. Then I must go down and meet her.

GUSTAV. No, you are to stay here. You have to be impolite. If her
conscience is clear, you'll catch it until your ears tingle. If she is
guilty, she'll come up and pet you.

ADOLPH. Are you so sure of that?

GUSTAV. Not quite, because a rabbit will sometimes turn and run in
loops, but I'll follow. My room is nest to this. [He points to the door
on the right] There I shall take up my position and watch you while you
are playing the game in here. But when you are done, we'll change parts:
I'll enter the cage and do tricks with the snake while you stick to the
key-hole. Then we meet in the park to compare notes. But keep your back
stiff. And if you feel yourself weakening, knock twice on the floor with
a chair.

ADOLPH. All right!--But don't go away. I must be sure that you are in
the next room.

GUSTAV. You can be quite sure of that. But don't get scared afterward,
when you watch me dissecting a human soul and laying out its various
parts on the table. They say it is rather hard on a beginner, but
once you have seen it done, you never want to miss it.--And be sure to
remember one thing: not a word about having met me, or having made any
new acquaintance whatever while she was away. Not one word! And I'll
discover her weak point by myself. Hush, she has arrived--she is in her
room now. She's humming to herself. That means she is in a rage!--Now,
straight in the back, please! And sit down on that chair over there, so
that she has to sit here--then I can watch both of you at the same time.

ADOLPH. It's only fifteen minutes to dinner--and no new guests have
arrived--for I haven't heard the bell ring. That means we shall be by
ourselves--worse luck!

GUSTAV. Are you weak?

ADOLPH. I am nothing at all!--Yes, I am afraid of what is now coming!
But I cannot keep it from coming! The stone has been set rolling--and
it was not the first drop of water that started it--nor wad it the last
one--but all of them together.

GUSTAV. Let it roll then--for peace will come in no other way. Good-bye
for a while now! [Goes out]

(ADOLPH nods back at him. Until then he has been standing with the
photograph in his hand. Now he tears it up and flings the pieces under
the table. Then he sits down on a chair, pulls nervously at his tie,
runs his fingers through his hair, crumples his coat lapel, and so on.)

TEKLA. [Enters, goes straight up to him and gives him a kiss; her manner
is friendly, frank, happy, and engaging] Hello, little brother! How is
he getting on?

ADOLPH. [Almost won over; speaking reluctantly and as if in jest] What
mischief have you been up to now that makes you come and kiss me?

TEKLA. I'll tell you: I've spent an awful lot of money.

ADOLPH. You have had a good time then?

TEKLA. Very! But not exactly at that creche meeting. That was plain
piffle, to tell the truth.--But what has little brother found to divert
himself with while his Pussy was away?

(Her eyes wander around the room as if she were looking for somebody or
sniffing something.)

ADOLPH. I've simply been bored.

TEKLA. And no company at all?

ADOLPH. Quite by myself.

TEKLA. [Watching him; she sits down on the sofa] Who has been sitting
here? ADOLPH. Over there? Nobody.

TEKLA. That's funny! The seat is still warm, and there is a hollow
here that looks as if it had been made by an elbow. Have you had lady
callers?

ADOLPH. I? You don't believe it, do you?

TEKLA. But you blush. I think little brother is not telling the truth.
Come and tell Pussy now what he has on his conscience.

(Draws him toward herself so that he sinks down with his head resting in
her lap.)

ADOLPH. You're a little devil--do you know that?

TEKLA. No, I don't know anything at all about myself.

ADOLPH. You never think about yourself, do you?

TEKLA. [Sniffing and taking notes] I think of nothing but myself--I am
a dreadful egoist. But what has made you turn so philosophical all at
once?

ADOLPH. Put your hand on my forehead.

TEKLA. [Prattling as if to a baby] Has he got ants in his head again?
Does he want me to take them away, does he? [Kisses him on the forehead]
There now! Is it all right now?

ADOLPH. Now it's all right. [Pause]

TEKLA. Well, tell me now what you have been doing to make the time go?
Have you painted anything?

ADOLPH. No, I am done with painting.

TEKLA. What? Done with painting?

ADOLPH. Yes, but don't scold me for it. How can I help it that I can't
paint any longer!

TEKLA. What do you mean to do then?

ADOLPH. I'll become a sculptor.

TEKLA. What a lot of brand new ideas again!

ADOLPH. Yes, but please don't scold! Look at that figure over there.

TEKLA. [Uncovering the wax figure] Well, I declare!--Who is that meant
for?

ADOLPH. Guess!

TEKLA. Is it Pussy? Has he got no shame at all?

ADOLPH. Is it like?

TEKLA. How can I tell when there is no face?

ADOLPH. Yes, but there is so much else--that's beautiful!

TEKLA. [Taps him playfully on the cheek] Now he must keep still or I'll
have to kiss him.

ADOLPH. [Holding her back] Now, now!--Somebody might come!

TEKLA. Well, what do I care? Can't I kiss my own husband, perhaps? Oh
yes, that's my lawful right.

ADOLPH. Yes, but don't you know--in the hotel here, they don't believe
we are married, because we are kissing each other such a lot. And it
makes no difference that we quarrel now and then, for lovers are said to
do that also.

TEKLA. Well, but what's the use of quarrelling? Why can't he always be
as nice as he is now? Tell me now? Can't he try? Doesn't he want us to
be happy?

ADOLPH. Do I want it? Yes, but--

TEKLA. There we are again! Who has put it into his head that he is not
to paint any longer?

ADOLPH. Who? You are always looking for somebody else behind me and my
thoughts. Are you jealous?

TEKLA. Yes, I am. I'm afraid somebody might take him away from me.

ADOLPH. Are you really afraid of that? You who know that no other woman
can take your place, and that I cannot live without you!

TEKLA. Well, I am not afraid of the women--it's your friends that fill
your head with all sorts of notions.

ADOLPH. [Watching her] You are afraid then? Of what are you afraid?

TEKLA. [Getting up] Somebody has been here. Who has been here?

ADOLPH. Don't you wish me to look at you?

TEKLA. Not in that way: it's not the way you are accustomed to look at
me.

ADOLPH. How was I looking at you then?

TEKLA. Way up under my eyelids.

ADOLPH. Under your eyelids--yes, I wanted to see what is behind them.

TEKLA. See all you can! There is nothing that needs to be hidden.
But--you talk differently, too--you use expressions--[studying him] you
philosophise--that's what you do! [Approaches him threateningly] Who has
been here?

ADOLPH. Nobody but my physician.

TEKLA. Your physician? Who is he?

ADOLPH. That doctor from Stromstad.

TEKLA. What's his name?

ADOLPH. Sjoberg.

TEKLA. What did he have to say?

ADOLPH. He said--well--among other things he said--that I am on the
verge of epilepsy--

TEKLA. Among other things? What more did he say?

ADOLPH. Something very unpleasant.

TEKLA. Tell me!

ADOLPH. He forbade us to live as man and wife for a while.

TEKLA. Oh, that's it! Didn't I just guess it! They want to separate us!
That's what I have understood a long time!

ADOLPH. You can't have understood, because there was nothing to
understand.

TEKLA. Oh yes, I have!

ADOLPH. How can you see what doesn't exist, unless your fear of
something has stirred up your fancy into seeing what has never existed?
What is it you fear? That I might borrow somebody else's eyes in order
to see you as you are, and not as you seem to be?

TEKLA. Keep your imagination in check, Adolph! It is the beast that
dwells in man's soul.

ADOLPH. Where did you learn that? From those chaste young men on the
boat--did you?

TEKLA. [Not at all abashed] Yes, there is something to be learned from
youth also.

ADOLPH. I think you are already beginning to have a taste for youth?

TEKLA. I have always liked youth. That's why I love you. Do you object?

ADOLPH. No, but I should prefer to have no partners.

TEKLA. [Prattling roguishly] My heart is so big, little brother, that
there is room in it for many more than him.

ADOLPH. But little brother doesn't want any more brothers.

TEKLA. Come here to Pussy now and get his hair pulled because he is
jealous--no, envious is the right word for it!

(Two knocks with a chair are heard from the adjoining room, where GUSTAV
is.)

ADOLPH. No, I don't want to play now. I want to talk seriously.

TEKLA. [Prattling] Mercy me, does he want to talk seriously? Dreadful,
how serious he's become! [Takes hold of his head and kisses him] Smile a
little--there now!

ADOLPH. [Smiling against his will] Oh, you're the--I might almost think
you knew how to use magic!

TEKLA. Well, can't he see now? That's why he shouldn't start any
trouble--or I might use my magic to make him invisible!

ADOLPH. [Gets up] Will you sit for me a moment, Tekla? With the side of
your face this way, so that I can put a face on my figure.

TEKLA. Of course, I will.

[Turns her head so he can see her in profile.]

ADOLPH. [Gazes hard at her while pretending to work at the figure] Don't
think of me now--but of somebody else.

TEKLA. I'll think of my latest conquest.

ADOLPH. That chaste young man?

TEKLA. Exactly! He had a pair of the prettiest, sweetest moustaches,
and his cheek looked like a peach--it was so soft and rosy that you just
wanted to bite it.

ADOLPH. [Darkening] Please keep that expression about the mouth.

TEKLA. What expression?

ADOLPH. A cynical, brazen one that I have never seen before.

TEKLA. [Making a face] This one?

ADOLPH. Just that one! [Getting up] Do you know how Bret Harte pictures
an adulteress?

TEKLA. [Smiling] No, I have never read Bret Something.

ADOLPH. As a pale creature that cannot blush.

TEKLA. Not at all? But when she meets her lover, then she must blush, I
am sure, although her husband or Mr. Bret may not be allowed to see it.

ADOLPH. Are you so sure of that?

TEKLA. [As before] Of course, as the husband is not capable of bringing
the blood up to her head, he cannot hope to behold the charming
spectacle.

ADOLPH. [Enraged] Tekla!

TEKLA. Oh, you little ninny!

ADOLPH. Tekla!

TEKLA. He should call her Pussy--then I might get up a pretty little
blush for his sake. Does he want me to?

ADOLPH. [Disarmed] You minx, I'm so angry with you, that I could bite
you!

TEKLA. [Playfully] Come and bite me then!--Come!

[Opens her arms to him.]

ADOLPH. [Puts his hands around her neck and kisses her] Yes, I'll bite
you to death!

TEKLA. [Teasingly] Look out--somebody might come!

ADOLPH. Well, what do I care! I care for nothing else in the world if I
can only have you!

TEKLA. And when, you don't have me any longer?

ADOLPH. Then I shall die!

TEKLA. But you are not afraid of losing me, are you--as I am too old to
be wanted by anybody else?

ADOLPH. You have not forgotten my words yet, Tekla! I take it all back
now!

TEKLA. Can you explain to me why you are at once so jealous and so
cock-sure?

ADOLPH. No, I cannot explain anything at all. But it's possible that
the thought of somebody else having possessed you may still be gnawing
within me. At times it appears to me as if our love were nothing but a
fiction, an attempt at self-defence, a passion kept up as a matter of
honor--and I can't think of anything that would give me more pain than
to have HIM know that I am unhappy. Oh, I have never seen him--but the
mere thought that a person exists who is waiting for my misfortune to
arrive, who is daily calling down curses on my head, who will roar
with laughter when I perish--the mere idea of it obsesses me, drives me
nearer to you, fascinates me, paralyses me!

TEKLA. Do you think I would let him have that joy? Do you think I would
make his prophecy come true?

ADOLPH. No, I cannot think you would.

TEKLA. Why don't you keep calm then?

ADOLPH. No, you upset me constantly by your coquetry. Why do you play
that kind of game?

TEKLA. It is no game. I want to be admired--that's all!

ADOLPH. Yes, but only by men!

TEKLA. Of course! For a woman is never admired by other women.

ADOLPH. Tell me, have you heard anything--from him--recently?

TEKLA. Not in the last sis months.

ADOLPH. Do you ever think of him?

TEKLA. No!--Since the child died we have broken off our correspondence.

ADOLPH. And you have never seen him at all?

TEKLA. No, I understand he is living somewhere down on the West Coast.
But why is all this coming into your head just now?

ADOLPH. I don't know. But during the last few days, while I was alone, I
kept thinking of him--how he might have felt when he was left alone that
time.

TEKLA. Are you having an attack of bad conscience?

ADOLPH. I am.

TEKLA. You feel like a thief, do you?

ADOLPH. Almost!

TEKLA. Isn't that lovely! Women can be stolen as you steal children or
chickens? And you regard me as his chattel or personal property. I am
very much obliged to you!

ADOLPH. No, I regard you as his wife. And that's a good deal more than
property--for there can be no substitute. TEKLA. Oh, yes! If you only
heard that he had married again, all these foolish notions would leave
you.--Have you not taken his place with me?

ADOLPH. Well, have I?--And did you ever love him?

TEKLA. Of course, I did!

ADOLPH. And then--

TEKLA. I grew tired of him!

ADOLPH. And if you should tire of me also?

TEKLA. But I won't!

ADOLPH. If somebody else should turn up--one who had all the qualities
you are looking for in a man now--suppose only--then you would leave me?

TEKLA. No.

ADOLPH. If he captivated you? So that you couldn't live without him?
Then you would leave me, of course?

TEKLA. No, that doesn't follow.

ADOLPH. But you couldn't love two at the same time, could you?

TEKLA. Yes! Why not?

ADOLPH. That's something I cannot understand.

TEKLA. But things exist although you do not understand them. All persons
are not made in the same way, you know.

ADOLPH. I begin to see now!

TEKLA. No, really!

ADOLPH. No, really? [A pause follows, during which he seems to struggle
with some--memory that will not come back] Do you know, Tekla, that your
frankness is beginning to be painful?

TEKLA. And yet it used to be my foremost virtue In your mind, and one
that you taught me.

ADOLPH. Yes, but it seems to me as if you were hiding something behind
that frankness of yours.

TEKLA. That's the new tactics, you know.

ADOLPH. I don't know why, but this place has suddenly become offensive
to me. If you feel like it, we might return home--this evening!

TEKLA. What kind of notion is that? I have barely arrived and I don't
feel like starting on another trip.

ADOLPH. But I want to.

TEKLA. Well, what's that to me?--You can go!

ADOLPH. But I demand that you take the next boat with me!

TEKLA. Demand?--What are you talking about?

ADOLPH. Do you realise that you are my wife?

TEKLA. Do you realise that you are my husband?

ADOLPH. Well, there's a difference between those two things.

TEKLA. Oh, that's the way you are talking now!--You have never loved me!

ADOLPH. Haven't I?

TEKLA. No, for to love is to give.

ADOLPH. To love like a man is to give; to love like a woman is to
take.--And I have given, given, given!

TEKLA. Pooh! What have you given?

ADOLPH. Everything!

TEKLA. That's a lot! And if it be true, then I must have taken it. Are
you beginning to send in bills for your gifts now? And if I have taken
anything, this proves only my love for you. A woman cannot receive
anything except from her lover.

ADOLPH. Her lover, yes! There you spoke the truth! I have been your
lover, but never your husband.

TEKLA. Well, isn't that much more agreeable--to escape playing chaperon?
But if you are not satisfied with your position, I'll send you packing,
for I don't want a husband.

ADOLPH. No, that's what I have noticed. For a while ago, when you began
to sneak away from me like a thief with his booty, and when you began to
seek company of your own where you could flaunt my plumes and display my
gems, then I felt, like reminding you of your debt. And at once I became
a troublesome creditor whom you wanted to get rid of. You wanted to
repudiate your own notes, and in order not to increase your debt to me,
you stopped pillaging my safe and began to try those of other people
instead. Without having done anything myself, I became to you merely the
husband. And now I am going to be your husband whether you like it or
not, as I am not allowed to be your lover any longer.

TEKLA. [Playfully] Now he shouldn't talk nonsense, the sweet little
idiot!

ADOLPH. Look out: it's dangerous to think everybody an idiot but
oneself!

TEKLA. But that's what everybody thinks.

ADOLPH. And I am beginning to suspect that he--your former husband--was
not so much of an idiot after all.

TEKLA. Heavens! Are you beginning to sympathise with--him?

ADOLPH. Yes, not far from it,

TEKLA. Well, well! Perhaps you would like to make his acquaintance and
pour out your overflowing heart to him? What a striking picture! But I
am also beginning to feel drawn to him, as I am growing more and more
tired of acting as wetnurse. For he was at least a man, even though he
had the fault of being married to me.

ADOLPH. There, you see! But you had better not talk so loud--we might be
overheard.

TEKLA. What would it matter if they took us for married people?

ADOLPH. So now you are getting fond of real male men also, and at the
same time you have a taste for chaste young men?

TEKLA. There are no limits to what I can like, as you may see. My heart
is open to everybody and everything, to the big and the small, the
handsome and the ugly, the new and the old--I love the whole world.

ADOLPH. Do you know what that means?

TEKLA. No, I don't know anything at all. I just FEEL.

ADOLPH. It means that old age is near.

TEKLA. There you are again! Take care!

ADOLPH. Take care yourself!

TEKLA. Of what?

ADOLPH. Of the knife!

TEKLA. [Prattling] Little brother had better not play with such
dangerous things.

ADOLPH. I have quit playing.

TEKLA. Oh, it's earnest, is it? Dead earnest! Then I'll show you
that--you are mistaken. That is to say--you'll never see it, never know
it, but all the rest of the world will know It. And you'll suspect it,
you'll believe it, and you'll never have another moment's peace. You'll
have the feeling of being ridiculous, of being deceived, but you'll
never get any proof of it. For that's what married men never get.

ADOLPH. You hate me then?

TEKLA. No, I don't. And I don't think I shall either. But that's
probably because you are nothing to me but a child.

ADOLPH. At this moment, yes. But do you remember how it was while the
storm swept over us? Then you lay there like an infant in arms and just
cried. Then you had to sit on my lap, and I had to kiss your eyes to
sleep. Then I had to be your nurse; had to see that you fixed your hair
before going out; had to send your shoes to the cobbler, and see that
there was food in the house. I had to sit by your side, holding your
hand for hours at a time: you were afraid, afraid of the whole world,
because you didn't have a single friend, and because you were crushed by
the hostility of public opinion. I had to talk courage into you until my
mouth was dry and my head ached. I had to make myself believe that I
was strong. I had to force myself into believing in the future. And so I
brought you back to life, when you seemed already dead. Then you admired
me. Then I was the man--not that kind of athlete you had just left, but
the man of will-power, the mesmerist who instilled new nervous energy
into your flabby muscles and charged your empty brain with a new store
of electricity. And then I gave you back your reputation. I brought you
new friends, furnished you with a little court of people who, for the
sake of friendship to me, let themselves be lured into admiring you.
I set you to rule me and my house. Then I painted my best pictures,
glimmering with reds and blues on backgrounds of gold, and there was not
an exhibition then where I didn't hold a place of honour. Sometimes you
were St. Cecilia, and sometimes Mary Stuart--or little Karin, whom King
Eric loved. And I turned public attention in your direction. I compelled
the clamorous herd to see you with my own infatuated vision. I plagued
them with your personality, forced you literally down their throats,
until that sympathy which makes everything possible became yours at
last--and you could stand on your own feet. When you reached that far,
then my strength was used up, and I collapsed from the overstrain--in
lifting you up, I had pushed myself down. I was taken ill, and my
illness seemed an annoyance to you at the moment when all life had just
begun to smile at you--and sometimes it seemed to me as if, in your
heart, there was a secret desire to get rid of your creditor and the
witness of your rise. Your love began to change into that of a grown-up
sister, and for lack of better I accustomed myself to the new part of
little brother. Your tenderness for me remained, and even increased, but
it was mingled with a suggestion of pity that had in it a good deal of
contempt. And this changed into open scorn as my talent withered and
your own sun rose higher. But in some mysterious way the fountainhead
of your inspiration seemed to dry up when I could no longer replenish
it--or rather when you wanted to show its independence of me. And at
last both of us began to lose ground. And then you looked for somebody
to put the blame on. A new victim! For you are weak, and you can never
carry your own burdens of guilt and debt. And so you picked me for a
scapegoat and doomed me to slaughter. But when you cut my thews, you
didn't realise that you were also crippling yourself, for by this time
our years of common life had made twins of us. You were a shoot sprung
from my stem, and you wanted to cut yourself loose before the shoot had
put out roots of its own, and that's why you couldn't grow by yourself.
And my stem could not spare its main branch--and so stem and branch must
die together.

TEKLA. What you mean with all this, of course, is that you have written
my books.

ADOLPH. No, that's what you want me to mean in order to make me out
a liar. I don't use such crude expressions as you do, and I spoke
for something like five minutes to get in all the nuances, all the
halftones, all the transitions--but your hand-organ has only a single
note in it.

TEKLA. Yes, but the summary of the whole story is that you have written
my books.

ADOLPH. No, there is no summary. You cannot reduce a chord into a single
note. You cannot translate a varied life into a sum of one figure. I
have made no blunt statements like that of having written your books.

TEKLA. But that's what you meant!

ADOLPH. [Beyond himself] I did not mean it.

TEKLA. But the sum of it--

ADOLPH. [Wildly] There can be no sum without an addition. You get an
endless decimal fraction for quotient when your division does not work
out evenly. I have not added anything.

TEKLA. But I can do the adding myself.

ADOLPH. I believe it, but then I am not doing it.

TEKLA. No, but that's what you wanted to do.

ADOLPH. [Exhausted, closing his eyes] No, no, no--don't speak to
me--you'll drive me into convulsions. Keep silent! Leave me alone! You
mutilate my brain with your clumsy pincers--you put your claws into my
thoughts and tear them to pieces!

(He seems almost unconscious and sits staring straight ahead while his
thumbs are bent inward against the palms of his hands.)

TEKLA. [Tenderly] What is it? Are you sick?

(ADOLPH motions her away.)

TEKLA. Adolph!

(ADOLPH shakes his head at her.)

TEKLA. Adolph.

ADOLPH. Yes.

TEKLA. Do you admit that you were unjust a moment ago?

ADOLPH. Yes, yes, yes, yes, I admit!

TEKLA. And do you ask my pardon?

ADOLPH. Yes, yes, yes, I ask your pardon--if you only won't speak to me!

TEKLA. Kiss my hand then!

ADOLPH. [Kissing her hand] I'll kiss your hand--if you only don't speak
to me!

TEKLA. And now you had better go out for a breath of fresh air before
dinner.

ADOLPH. Yes, I think I need it. And then we'll pack and leave.

TEKLA. No!

ADOLPH. [On his feet] Why? There must be a reason.

TEKLA. The reason is that I have promised to be at the concert to-night.

ADOLPH. Oh, that's it!

TEKLA. Yes, that's it. I have promised to attend--

ADOLPH. Promised? Probably you said only that you might go, and that
wouldn't prevent you from saying now that you won't go.

TEKLA. No, I am not like you: I keep my word.

ADOLPH. Of course, promises should be kept, but we don't have to live
up to every little word we happen to drop. Perhaps there is somebody who
has made you promise to go.

TEKLA. Yes.

ADOLPH. Then you can ask to be released from your promise because your
husband is sick.

TEKLA, No, I don't want to do that, and you are not sick enough to be
kept from going with me.

ADOLPH. Why do you always want to drag me along? Do you feel safer then?

TEKLA. I don't know what you mean.

ADOLPH. That's what you always say when you know I mean something
that--doesn't please you.

TEKLA. So-o! What is it now that doesn't please me?

ADOLPH. Oh, I beg you, don't begin over again--Good-bye for a while!

(Goes out through the door in the rear and then turns to the right.)

(TEKLA is left alone. A moment later GUSTAV enters and goes straight
up to the table as if looking for a newspaper. He pretends not to see
TEKLA.)

TEKLA. [Shows agitation, but manages to control herself] Oh, is it you?

GUSTAV. Yes, it's me--I beg your pardon!

TEKLA. Which way did you come?

GUSTAV. By land. But--I am not going to stay, as--

TEKLA. Oh, there is no reason why you shouldn't.--Well, it was some time
ago--

GUSTAV. Yes, some time.

TEKLA. You have changed a great deal.

GUSTAV. And you are as charming as ever, A little younger, if anything.
Excuse me, however--I am not going to spoil your happiness by my
presence. And if I had known you were here, I should never--

TEKLA. If you don't think it improper, I should like you to stay.

GUSTAV. On my part there could be no objection, but I fear--well,
whatever I say, I am sure to offend you.

TEKLA. Sit down a moment. You don't offend me, for you possess that rare
gift--which was always yours--of tact and politeness.

GUSTAV. It's very kind of you. But one could hardly expect--that your
husband might regard my qualities in the same generous light as you.

TEKLA. On the contrary, he has just been speaking of you in very
sympathetic terms.

GUSTAV. Oh!--Well, everything becomes covered up by time, like names cut
in a tree--and not even dislike can maintain itself permanently in our
minds.

TEKLA. He has never disliked you, for he has never seen you. And as for
me, I have always cherished a dream--that of seeing you come together
as friends--or at least of seeing you meet for once in my presence--of
seeing you shake hands--and then go your different ways again.

GUSTAV. It has also been my secret longing to see her whom I used to
love more than my own life--to make sure that she was in good hands. And
although I have heard nothing but good of him, and am familiar with all
his work, I should nevertheless have liked, before it grew too late,
to look into his eyes and beg him to take good care of the treasure
Providence has placed in his possession. In that way I hoped also to lay
the hatred that must have developed instinctively between us; I wished
to bring some peace and humility into my soul, so that I might manage to
live through the rest of my sorrowful days.

TEKLA. You have uttered my own thoughts, and you have understood me. I
thank you for it!

GUSTAV. Oh, I am a man of small account, and have always been too
insignificant to keep you in the shadow. My monotonous way of living,
my drudgery, my narrow horizons--all that could not satisfy a soul like
yours, longing for liberty. I admit it. But you understand--you who have
searched the human soul--what it cost me to make such a confession to
myself.

TEKLA. It is noble, it is splendid, to acknowledge one's own
shortcomings--and it's not everybody that's capable of it. [Sighs] But
yours has always been an honest, and faithful, and reliable nature--one
that I had to respect--but--

GUSTAV. Not always--not at that time! But suffering purifies, sorrow
ennobles, and--I have suffered!

TEKLA. Poor Gustav! Can you forgive me? Tell me, can you?

GUSTAV. Forgive? What? I am the one who must ask you to forgive.

TEKLA. [Changing tone] I believe we are crying, both of us--we who are
old enough to know better!

GUSTAV. [Feeling his way] Old? Yes, I am old. But you--you grow younger
every day.

(He has by that time manoeuvred himself up to the chair on the left and
sits down on it, whereupon TEKLA sits down on the sofa.)

TEKLA. Do you think so?

GUSTAV. And then you know how to dress.

TEKLA. I learned that from you. Don't you remember how you figured out
what colors would be most becoming to me?

GUSTAV. No.

TEKLA. Yes, don't you remember--hm!--I can even recall how you used to
be angry with me whenever I failed to have at least a touch of crimson
about my dress.

GUSTAV. No, not angry! I was never angry with you.

TEKLA. Oh, yes, when you wanted to teach me how to think--do you
remember? For that was something I couldn't do at all.

GUSTAV. Of course, you could. It's something every human being does. And
you have become quite keen at it--at least when you write.

TEKLA. [Unpleasantly impressed; hurrying her words] Well, my dear
Gustav, it is pleasant to see you anyhow, and especially in a peaceful
way like this.

GUSTAV. Well, I can hardly be called a troublemaker, and you had a
pretty peaceful time with me.

TEKLA. Perhaps too much so.

GUSTAV. Oh! But you see, I thought you wanted me that way. It was at
least the impression you gave me while we were engaged.

TEKLA. Do you think one really knows what one wants at that time? And
then the mammas insist on all kinds of pretensions, of course.

GUSTAV. Well, now you must be having all the excitement you can wish.
They say that life among artists is rather swift, and I don't think your
husband can be called a sluggard.

TEKLA. You can get too much of a good thing.

GUSTAV. [Trying a new tack] What! I do believe you are still wearing the
ear-rings I gave you?

TEKLA. [Embarrassed] Why not? There was never any quarrel between
us--and then I thought I might wear them as a token--and a
reminder--that we were not enemies. And then, you know, it is impossible
to buy this kind of ear-rings any longer. [Takes off one of her
ear-rings.]

GUSTAV. Oh, that's all right, but what does your husband say of it?

TEKLA. Why should I mind what he says?

GUSTAV. Don't you mind that?--But you may be doing him an injury. It is
likely to make him ridiculous.

TEKLA. [Brusquely, as if speaking to herself almost] He was that before!

GUSTAV. [Rises when he notes her difficulty in putting back the
ear-ring] May I help you, perhaps?

TEKLA. Oh--thank you!

GUSTAV. [Pinching her ear] That tiny ear!--Think only if your husband
could see us now!

TEKLA. Wouldn't he howl, though!

GUSTAV. Is he jealous also?

TEKLA. Is he? I should say so!

[A noise is heard from the room on the right.]

GUSTAV. Who lives in that room?

TEKLA. I don't know.--But tell me how you are getting along and what you
are doing?

GUSTAV. Tell me rather how you are getting along?

(TEKLA is visibly confused, and without realising what she is doing, she
takes the cover off the wax figure.)

GUSTAV. Hello! What's that?--Well!--It must be you!

TEKLA. I don't believe so.

GUSTAV. But it is very like you.

TEKLA. [Cynically] Do you think so?

GUSTAV. That reminds me of the story--you know it--"How could your
majesty see that?"

TEKLA, [Laughing aloud] You are impossible!--Do you know any new
stories?

GUSTAV. No, but you ought to have some.

TEKLA. Oh, I never hear anything funny nowadays.

GUSTAV. Is he modest also?

TEKLA. Oh--well--

GUSTAV. Not an everything?

TEKLA. He isn't well just now.

GUSTAV. Well, why should little brother put his nose into other people's
hives?

TEKLA. [Laughing] You crazy thing!

GUSTAV. Poor chap!--Do you remember once when we were just married--we
lived in this very room. It was furnished differently in those days.
There was a chest of drawers against that wall there--and over there
stood the big bed.

TEKLA. Now you stop!

GUSTAV. Look at me!

TEKLA. Well, why shouldn't I?

[They look hard at each other.]

GUSTAV. Do you think a person can ever forget anything that has made a
very deep impression on him?

TEKLA. No! And our memories have a tremendous power. Particularly the
memories of our youth.

GUSTAV. Do you remember when I first met you? Then you were a pretty
little girl: a slate on which parents and governesses had made a few
scrawls that I had to wipe out. And then I filled it with inscriptions
that suited my own mind, until you believed the slate could hold nothing
more. That's the reason, you know, why I shouldn't care to be in your
husband's place--well, that's his business! But it's also the reason why
I take pleasure in meeting you again. Our thoughts fit together exactly.
And as I sit here and chat with you, it seems to me like drinking old
wine of my own bottling. Yes, it's my own wine, but it has gained a
great deal in flavour! And now, when I am about to marry again, I have
purposely picked out a young girl whom I can educate to suit myself. For
the woman, you know, is the man's child, and if she is not, he becomes
hers, and then the world turns topsy-turvy.

TEKLA. Are you going to marry again?

GUSTAV. Yes, I want to try my luck once more, but this time I am going
to make a better start, so that it won't end again with a spill.

TEKLA. Is she good looking?

GUSTAV. Yes, to me. But perhaps I am too old. It's queer--now when
chance has brought me together with you again--I am beginning to doubt
whether it will be possible to play the game over again.

TEKLA. How do you mean?

GUSTAV. I can feel that my roots stick in your soil, and the old wounds
are beginning to break open. You are a dangerous woman, Tekla!

TEKLA. Am I? And my young husband says that I can make no more
conquests.

GUSTAV. That means he has ceased to love you.

TEKLA. Well, I can't quite make out what love means to him.

GUSTAV. You have been playing hide and seek so long that at last you
cannot find each other at all. Such things do happen. You have had to
play the innocent to yourself, until he has lost his courage. There
ARE some drawbacks to a change, I tell you--there are drawbacks to it,
indeed.

TEKLA. Do you mean to reproach--

GUSTAV. Not at all! Whatever happens is to a certain extent necessary,
for if it didn't happen, something else would--but now it did happen,
and so it had to happen.

TEKLA. YOU are a man of discernment. And I have never met anybody with
whom I liked so much to exchange ideas. You are so utterly free from
all morality and preaching, and you ask so little of people, that it is
possible to be oneself in your presence. Do you know, I am jealous of
your intended wife!

GUSTAV. And do you realise that I am jealous of your husband?

TEKLA. [Rising] And now we must part! Forever!

GUSTAV. Yes, we must part! But not without a farewell--or what do you
say?

TEKLA. [Agitated] No!

GUSTAV. [Following after her] Yes!--Let us have a farewell! Let us drown
our memories--you know, there are intoxications so deep that when you
wake up all memories are gone. [Putting his arm around her waist] You
have been dragged down by a diseased spirit, who is infecting you with
his own anaemia. I'll breathe new life into you. I'll make your talent
blossom again in your autumn days, like a remontant rose. I'll----

(Two LADIES in travelling dress are seen in the doorway leading to the
veranda. They look surprised. Then they point at those within, laugh,
and disappear.)

TEKLA. [Freeing herself] Who was that?

GUSTAV. [Indifferently] Some tourists.

TEKLA. Leave me alone! I am afraid of you!

GUSTAV. Why?

TEKLA. You take my soul away from me!

GUSTAV. And give you my own in its place! And you have no soul for that
matter--it's nothing but a delusion.

TEKLA. You have a way of saying impolite things so that nobody can be
angry with you.

GUSTAV. It's because you feel that I hold the first mortgage on
you--Tell me now, when--and--where?

TEKLA. No, it wouldn't be right to him. I think he is still in love with
me, and I don't want to do any more harm.

GUSTAV. He does not love you! Do you want proofs?

TEKLA, Where can you get them?

GUSTAV. [Picking up the pieces of the photograph from the floor] Here!
See for yourself!

TEKLA. Oh, that's an outrage!

GUSTAV. Do you see? Now then, when? And where?

TEKLA. The false-hearted wretch!

GUSTAV. When?

TEKLA. He leaves to-night, with the eight-o'clock boat.

GUSTAV. And then--

TEKLA. At nine! [A noise is heard from the adjoining room] Who can be
living in there that makes such a racket?

GUSTAV. Let's see! [Goes over and looks through the keyhole] There's a
table that has been upset, and a smashed water caraffe--that's all! I
shouldn't wonder if they had left a dog locked up in there.--At nine
o'clock then?

TEKLA. All right! And let him answer for it himself.--What a depth of
deceit! And he who has always preached about truthfulness, and tried
to teach me to tell the truth!--But wait a little--how was it now?
He received me with something like hostility--didn't meet me at the
landing--and then--and then he made some remark about young men on
board the boat, which I pretended not to hear--but how could he know?
Wait--and then he began to philosophise about women--and then the
spectre of you seemed to be haunting him--and he talked of becoming a
sculptor, that being the art of the time--exactly in accordance with
your old speculations!

GUSTAV. No, really!

TEKLA. No, really?--Oh, now I understand! Now I begin to see what a
hideous creature you are! You have been here before and stabbed him to
death! It was you who had been sitting there on the sofa; it was you who
made him think himself an epileptic--that he had to live in celibacy;
that he ought to rise in rebellion against his wife; yes, it was
you!--How long have you been here?

GUSTAV. I have been here a week.

TEKLA. It was you, then, I saw on board the boat?

GUSTAV. It was.

TEKLA. And now you were thinking you could trap me?

GUSTAV. It has been done.

TEKLA. Not yet!

GUSTAV. Yes!

TEKLA. Like a wolf you went after my lamb. You came here with a
villainous plan to break up my happiness, and you were carrying it out,
when my eyes were opened, and I foiled you.

GUSTAV. Not quite that way, if you please. This is how it happened
in reality. Of course, it has been my secret hope that disaster might
overtake you. But I felt practically certain that no interference on
my part was required. And besides, I have been far too busy to have any
time left for intriguing. But when I happened to be moving about a bit,
and happened to see you with those young men on board the boat, then I
guessed the time had come for me to take a look at the situation. I came
here, and your lamb threw itself into the arms of the wolf. I won his
affection by some sort of reminiscent impression which I shall not be
tactless enough to explain to you. At first he aroused my sympathy,
because he seemed to be in the same fix as I was once. But then he
happened to touch old wounds--that book, you know, and "the idiot"--and
I was seized with a wish to pick him to pieces, and to mix up these so
thoroughly that they couldn't be put together again--and I succeeded,
thanks to the painstaking way in which you had done the work of
preparation. Then I had to deal with you. For you were the spring that
had kept the works moving, and you had to be taken apart--and what a
buzzing followed!--When I came in here, I didn't know exactly what to
say. Like a chess-player, I had laid a number of tentative plans, of
course, but my play had to depend on your moves. One thing led to the
other, chance lent me a hand, and finally I had you where I wanted
you.--Now you are caught!

TEKLA. No!

GUSTAV. Yes, you are! What you least wanted has happened. The world at
large, represented by two lady tourists--whom I had not sent for, as
I am not an intriguer--the world has seen how you became reconciled
to your former husband, and how you sneaked back repentantly into his
faithful arms. Isn't that enough?

TEKLA. It ought to be enough for your revenge--But tell me, how can you,
who are so enlightened and so right-minded--how is it possible that you,
who think whatever happens must happen, and that all our actions are
determined in advance--

GUSTAV. [Correcting her] To a certain extent determined.

TEKLA. That's the same thing!

GUSTAV. No!

TEKLA. [Disregarding him] How is it possible that you, who hold me
guiltless, as I was driven by my nature and the circumstances into
acting as I did--how can you think yourself entitled to revenge--?

GUSTAV. For that very reason--for the reason that my nature and the
circumstances drove me into seeking revenge. Isn't that giving both
sides a square deal? But do you know why you two had to get the worst of
it in this struggle?

(TEKLA looks scornful.)

GUSTAV. And why you were doomed to be fooled? Because I am stronger than
you, and wiser also. You have been the idiot--and he! And now you may
perceive that a man need not be an idiot because he doesn't write novels
or paint pictures. It might be well for you to bear this in mind.

TEKLA. Are you then entirely without feelings?

GUSTAV. Entirely! And for that very reason, you know, I am capable of
thinking--in which you have had no experience whatever-and of acting--in
which you have just had some slight experience.

TEKLA. And all this merely because I have hurt your vanity?

GUSTAV. Don't call that MERELY! You had better not go around hurting
other people's vanity. They have no more sensitive spot than that.

TEKLA. Vindictive wretch--shame on you!

GUSTAV. Dissolute wretch--shame on you!

TEKLA. Oh, that's my character, is it?

GUSTAV. Oh, that's my character, is it?--You ought to learn something
about human nature in others before you give your own nature free rein.
Otherwise you may get hurt, and then there will be wailing and gnashing
of teeth.

TEKLA. You can never forgive:--

GUSTAV. Yes, I have forgiven you!

TEKLA. You!

GUSTAV. Of course! Have I raised a hand against you during all these
years? No! And now I came here only to have a look at you, and it was
enough to burst your bubble. Have I uttered a single reproach? Have I
moralised or preached sermons? No! I played a joke or two on your dear
consort, and nothing more was needed to finish him.--But there is
no reason why I, the complainant, should be defending myself as I am
now--Tekla! Have you nothing at all to reproach yourself with?

TEKLA. Nothing at all! Christians say that our actions are governed by
Providence; others call it Fate; in either case, are we not free from
all liability?

GUSTAV. In a measure, yes; but there is always a narrow margin left
unprotected, and there the liability applies in spite of all. And
sooner or later the creditors make their appearance. Guiltless, but
accountable! Guiltless in regard to one who is no more; accountable to
oneself and one's fellow beings.

TEKLA. So you came here to dun me?

GUSTAV. I came to take back what you had stolen, not what you had
received as a gift. You had stolen my honour, and I could recover it
only by taking yours. This, I think, was my right--or was it not?

TEKLA. Honour? Hm! And now you feel satisfied?

GUSTAV. Now I feel satisfied. [Rings for a waiter.]

TEKLA. And now you are going home to your fiancee?

GUSTAV. I have no fiancee! Nor am I ever going to have one. I am not
going home, for I have no home, and don't want one.

(A WAITER comes in.)

GUSTAV. Get me my bill--I am leaving by the eight o'clock boat.

(THE WAITER bows and goes out.)

TEKLA. Without making up?

GUSTAV. Making up? You use such a lot of words that have lost
their--meaning. Why should we make up? Perhaps you want all three of us
to live together? You, if anybody, ought to make up by making good what
you took away, but this you cannot do. You just took, and what you took
you consumed, so that there is nothing left to restore.--Will it satisfy
you if I say like this: forgive me that you tore my heart to pieces;
forgive me that you disgraced me; forgive me that you made me the
laughing-stock of my pupils through every week-day of seven long years;
forgive me that I set you free from parental restraints, that I released
you from the tyranny of ignorance and superstition, that I set you to
rule my house, that I gave you position and friends, that I made a woman
out of the child you were before? Forgive me as I forgive you!--Now I
have torn up your note! Now you can go and settle your account with the
other one!

TEKLA. What have you done with him? I am beginning to suspect--something
terrible!

GUSTAV. With him? Do you still love him?

TEKLA. Yes!

GUSTAV. And a moment ago it was me! Was that also true?

TEKLA. It was true.

GUSTAV. Do you know what you are then?

TEKLA. You despise me?

GUSTAV. I pity you. It is a trait--I don't call it a fault--just a
trait, which is rendered disadvantageous by its results. Poor Tekla! I
don't know--but it seems almost as if I were feeling a certain regret,
although I am as free from any guilt--as you! But perhaps it will be
useful to you to feel what I felt that time.--Do you know where your
husband is?

TEKLA. I think I know now--he is in that room in there! And he has heard
everything! And seen everything! And the man who sees his own wraith
dies!

(ADOLPH appears in the doorway leading to the veranda. His face is white
as a sheet, and there is a bleeding scratch on one cheek. His eyes are
staring and void of all expression. His lips are covered with froth.)

GUSTAV. [Shrinking back] No, there he is!--Now you can settle with him
and see if he proves as generous as I have been.--Good-bye!

(He goes toward the left, but stops before he reaches the door.)

TEKLA. [Goes to meet ADOLPH with open arms] Adolph!

(ADOLPH leans against the door-jamb and sinks gradually to the floor.)

TEKLA. [Throwing herself upon his prostrate body and caressing him]
Adolph! My own child! Are you still alive--oh, speak, speak!--Please
forgive your nasty Tekla! Forgive me, forgive me, forgive me!--Little
brother must say something, I tell him!--No, good God, he doesn't hear!
He is dead! O God in heaven! O my God! Help!

GUSTAV. Why, she really must have loved HIM, too!--Poor creature!

(Curtain.)





PARIAH




INTRODUCTION


Both "Creditors" and "Pariah" were written in the winter of 1888-89 at
Holte, near Copenhagen, where Strindberg, assisted by his first wife,
was then engaged in starting what he called a "Scandinavian Experimental
Theatre." In March, 1889, the two plays were given by students from the
University of Copenhagen, and with Mrs. von Essen Strindberg as Tekla. A
couple of weeks later the performance was repeated across the Sound,
in the Swedish city of Malmo, on which occasion the writer of this
introduction, then a young actor, assisted in the stage management. One
of the actors was Gustav Wied, a Danish playwright and novelist, whose
exquisite art since then has won him European fame. In the audience was
Ola Hansson, a Swedish novelist and poet who had just published a short
story from which Strindberg, according to his own acknowledgment on
playbill and title-page, had taken the name and the theme of "Pariah."

Mr. Hansson has printed a number of letters (Tilskueren, Copenhagen,
July, 1912) written to him by Strindberg about that time, as well as
some very informative comments of his own. Concerning the performance
of Malmo he writes: "It gave me a very unpleasant sensation. What did
it mean? Why had Strindberg turned my simple theme upsidedown so that
it became unrecognisable? Not a vestige of the 'theme from Ola Hansson'
remained. Yet he had even suggested that he and I act the play together,
I not knowing that it was to be a duel between two criminals. And he had
at first planned to call it 'Aryan and Pariah'--which meant, of course,
that the strong Aryan, Strindberg, was to crush the weak Pariah,
Hansson, coram populo."

In regard to his own story Mr. Hansson informs us that it dealt with "a
man who commits a forgery and then tells about it, doing both in a sort
of somnambulistic state whereby everything is left vague and undefined."
At that moment "Raskolnikov" was in the air, so to speak. And without
wanting in any way to suggest imitation, I feel sure that the groundnote
of the story was distinctly Dostoievskian. Strindberg himself had been
reading Nietzsche and was--largely under the pressure of a reaction
against the popular disapproval of his anti-feministic attitude--being
driven more and more into a superman philosophy which reached its
climax in the two novels "Chandalah" (1889) and "At the Edge of the Sea"
(1890). The Nietzschean note is unmistakable in the two plays contained
in the present volume.

But these plays are strongly colored by something else--by something
that is neither Hansson-Dostoievski nor Strindberg-Nietzsche. The
solution of the problem is found in the letters published by
Mr. Hansson. These show that while Strindberg was still planning
"Creditors," and before he had begun "Pariah," he had borrowed
from Hansson a volume of tales by Edgar Allan Poe. It was his
first acquaintance with the work of Poe, though not with American
literature--for among his first printed work was a series of
translations from American humourists; and not long ago a Swedish
critic (Gunnar Castren in Samtiden, Christiania, June, 1912) wrote of
Strindberg's literary beginnings that "he had learned much from Swedish
literature, but probably more from Mark Twain and Dickens."

The impression Poe made on Strindberg was overwhelming. He returns to
it in one letter after another. Everything that suits his mood of the
moment is "Poesque" or "E. P-esque." The story that seems to have made
the deepest impression of all was "The Gold Bug," though his thought
seems to have distilled more useful material out of certain other
stories illustrating Poe's theories about mental suggestion. Under the
direct influence of these theories, Strindberg, according to his own
statements to Hansson, wrote the powerful one-act play "Simoom," and
made Gustav in "Creditors" actually CALL FORTH the latent epileptic
tendencies in Adolph. And on the same authority we must trace the method
of: psychological detection practised by Mr. X. in "Pariah" directly to
"The Gold Bug."

Here we have the reason why Mr. Hansson could find so little of his
story in the play. And here we have the origin of a theme which, while
not quite new to him, was ever afterward to remain a favourite one with
Strindberg: that of a duel between intellect and cunning. It forms the
basis of such novels as "Chandalah" and "At the Edge of the Sea," but
it recurs in subtler form in works of much later date. To readers of the
present day, Mr. X.--that striking antithesis of everything a scientist
used to stand for in poetry--is much less interesting as a superman in
spe than as an illustration of what a morally and mentally normal man
can do with the tools furnished him by our new understanding of human
ways and human motives. And in giving us a play that holds our interest
as firmly as the best "love plot" ever devised, although the stage shows
us only two men engaged in an intellectual wrestling match, Strindberg
took another great step toward ridding the drama of its old, shackling
conventions.

The name of this play has sometimes been translated as "The Outcast,"
whereby it becomes confused with "The Outlaw," a much earlier play on
a theme from the old Sagas. I think it better, too, that the Hindu
allusion in the Swedish title be not lost, for the best of men may
become an outcast, but the baseness of the Pariah is not supposed to
spring only from lack of social position.



PARIAH

AN ACT

1889




PERSONS


MR. X., an archaeologist, Middle-aged man.

MR. Y., an American traveller, Middle-aged man.




SCENE

(A simply furnished room in a farmhouse. The door and the windows in the
background open on a landscape. In the middle of the room stands a
big dining-table, covered at one end by books, writing materials,
and antiquities; at the other end, by a microscope, insect cases, and
specimen jars full of alchohol.)

(On the left side hangs a bookshelf. Otherwise the furniture is that of
a well-to-do farmer.)

(MR. Y. enters in his shirt-sleeves, carrying a butterfly-net and a
botany-can. He goes straight up to the bookshelf and takes down a book,
which he begins to read on the spot.)

(The landscape outside and the room itself are steeped in sunlight. The
ringing of church bells indicates that the morning services are just
over. Now and then the cackling of hens is heard from the outside.)

(MR. X. enters, also in his shirt-sleeves.)

(MR. Y. starts violently, puts the book back on the shelf upside-down,
and pretends to be looking for another volume.)

MR. X. This heat is horrible. I guess we are going to have a
thunderstorm.

MR. Y. What makes you think so?

MR. X. The bells have a kind of dry ring to them, the flies are sticky,
and the hens cackle. I meant to go fishing, but I couldn't find any
worms. Don't you feel nervous?

MR. Y. [Cautiously] I?--A little.

MR. X. Well, for that matter, you always look as if you were expecting
thunderstorms.

MR. Y. [With a start] Do I?

MR. X. Now, you are going away tomorrow, of course, so it is not to be
wondered at that you are a little "journey-proud."--Anything new?--Oh,
there's the mail! [Picks up some letters from the table] My, I have
palpitation of the heart every time I open a letter! Nothing but debts,
debts, debts! Have you ever had any debts?

MR. Y. [After some reflection] N-no.

MR. X. Well, then you don't know what it means to receive a lot of
overdue bills. [Reads one of the letters] The rent unpaid--the landlord
acting nasty--my wife in despair. And here am I sitting waist-high in
gold! [He opens an iron-banded box that stands on the table; then both
sit down at the table, facing each other] Just look--here I have
six thousand crowns' worth of gold which I have dug up in the last
fortnight. This bracelet alone would bring me the three hundred and
fifty crowns I need. And with all of it I might make a fine career for
myself. Then I could get the illustrations made for my treatise at once;
I could get my work printed, and--I could travel! Why don't I do it, do
you suppose?

MR. Y. I suppose you are afraid to be found out.

MR. X. That, too, perhaps. But don't you think an intelligent fellow
like myself might fix matters so that he was never found out? I am alone
all the time--with nobody watching me--while I am digging out there in
the fields. It wouldn't be strange if I put something in my own pockets
now and then.

MR. Y. Yes, but the worst danger lies in disposing of the stuff.

MR. X. Pooh! I'd melt it down, of course--every bit of it--and then I'd
turn it into coins--with just as much gold in them as genuine ones, of
course---

MR. Y. Of course!

MR. X. Well, you can easily see why. For if I wanted to dabble in
counterfeits, then I need not go digging for gold first. [Pause] It is a
strange thing anyhow, that if anybody else did what I cannot make myself
do, then I'd be willing to acquit him--but I couldn't possibly acquit
myself. I might even make a brilliant speech in defence of the thief,
proving that this gold was res nullius, or nobody's, as it had been
deposited at a time when property rights did not yet exist; that even
under existing rights it could belong only to the first finder of it, as
the ground-owner has never included it in the valuation of his property;
and so on.

MR. Y. And probably it would be much easier for you to do this if
the--hm!--the thief had not been prompted by actual need, but by a
mania for collecting, for instance--or by scientific aspirations--by the
ambition to keep a discovery to himself. Don't you think so?

MR. X. You mean that I could not acquit him if actual need had been the
motive? Yes, for that's the only motive which the law will not accept in
extenuation. That motive makes a plain theft of it.

MR. Y. And this you couldn't excuse?

MR. X. Oh, excuse--no, I guess not, as the law wouldn't. On the other
hand, I must admit that it would be hard for me to charge a collector
with theft merely because he had appropriated some specimen not yet
represented in his own collection.

MR. Y. So that vanity or ambition might excuse what could not be excused
by need?

MR. X. And yet need ought to be the more telling excuse--the only
one, in fact? But I feel as I have said. And I can no more change this
feeling than I can change my own determination not to steal under any
circumstances whatever.

MR. Y. And I suppose you count it a great merit that you
cannot--hm!--steal?

MR. X. No, my disinclination to steal is just as irresistible as the
inclination to do so is irresistible with some people. So it cannot be
called a merit. I cannot do it, and the other one cannot refrain!--But
you understand, of course, that I am not without a desire to own this
gold. Why don't I take it then? Because I cannot! It's an inability--and
the lack of something cannot be called a merit. There!

[Closes the box with a slam. Stray clouds have cast their shadows on the
landscape and darkened the room now and then. Now it grows quite dark as
when a thunderstorm is approaching.]

MR. X. How close the air is! I guess the storm is coming all right.

[MR. Y. gets up and shuts the door and all the windows.]

MR. X. Are you afraid of thunder?

MR. Y. It's just as well to be careful.

(They resume their seats at the table.)

MR. X. You're a curious chap! Here you come dropping down like a bomb
a fortnight ago, introducing yourself as a Swedish-American who is
collecting flies for a small museum---

MR. Y. Oh, never mind me now!

MR. X. That's what you always say when I grow tired of talking about
myself and want to turn my attention to you. Perhaps that was the reason
why I took to you as I did--because you let me talk about myself? All at
once we seemed like old friends. There were no angles about you against
which I could bump myself, no pins that pricked. There was something
soft about your whole person, and you overflowed with that tact which
only well-educated people know how to show. You never made a noise when
you came home late at night or got up early in the morning. You were
patient in small things, and you gave in whenever a conflict seemed
threatening. In a word, you proved yourself the perfect companion! But
you were entirely too compliant not to set me wondering about you in the
long run--and you are too timid, too easily frightened. It seems almost
as if you were made up of two different personalities. Why, as I sit
here looking at your back in the mirror over there--it is as if I were
looking at somebody else.

(MR. Y. turns around and stares at the mirror.)

MR. X. No, you cannot get a glimpse of your own back, man!--In front you
appear like a fearless sort of fellow, one meeting his fate with bared
breast, but from behind--really, I don't want to be impolite, but--you
look as if you were carrying a burden, or as if you were crouching to
escape a raised stick. And when I look at that red cross your suspenders
make on your white shirt--well, it looks to me like some kind of emblem,
like a trade-mark on a packing-box--

MR. Y. I feel as if I'd choke--if the storm doesn't break soon--

MR. X. It's coming--don't you worry!--And your neck! It looks as if
there ought to be another kind of face on top of it, a face quite
different in type from yours. And your ears come so close together
behind that sometimes I wonder what race you belong to. [A flash of
lightning lights up the room] Why, it looked as if that might have
struck the sheriff's house!

MR. Y. [Alarmed] The sheriff's!

MR. X. Oh, it just looked that way. But I don't think we'll get much of
this storm. Sit down now and let us have a talk, as you are going away
to-morrow. One thing I find strange is that you, with whom I have become
so intimate in this short time--that you are one of those whose image
I cannot call up when I am away from them. When you are not here, and
I happen to think of you, I always get the vision of another
acquaintance--one who does not resemble you, but with whom you have
certain traits in common.

MR. Y. Who is he?

MR. X. I don't want to name him, but--I used for several years to take
my meals at a certain place, and there, at the side-table where they
kept the whiskey and the otter preliminaries, I met a little blond man,
with blond, faded eyes. He had a wonderful faculty for making his way
through a crowd, without jostling anybody or being jostled himself. And
from his customary place down by the door he seemed perfectly able to
reach whatever he wanted on a table that stood some six feet away from
him. He seemed always happy just to be in company. But when he met
anybody he knew, then the joy of it made him roar with laughter, and he
would hug and pat the other fellow as if he hadn't seen a human face
for years. When anybody stepped on his foot, he smiled as if eager to
apologise for being in the way. For two years I watched him and amused
myself by guessing at his occupation and character. But I never asked
who he was; I didn't want to know, you see, for then all the fun would
have been spoiled at once. That man had just your quality of being
indefinite. At different times I made him out to be a teacher who
had never got his licence, a non-commissioned officer, a druggist, a
government clerk, a detective--and like you, he looked as if made out of
two pieces, for the front of him never quite fitted the back. One day
I happened to read in a newspaper about a big forgery committed by
a well-known government official. Then I learned that my indefinite
gentleman had been a partner of the forger's brother, and that his name
was Strawman. Later on I learned that the aforesaid Strawman used to run
a circulating library, but that he was now the police reporter of a big
daily. How in the world could I hope to establish a connection between
the forgery, the police, and my little man's peculiar manners? It was
beyond me; and when I asked a friend whether Strawman had ever been
punished for something, my friend couldn't answer either yes or no--he
just didn't know! [Pause.]

MR. Y. Well, had he ever been--punished?

MR. X. No, he had not. [Pause.]

MR. Y. And that was the reason, you think, why the police had such an
attraction for him, and why he was so afraid of offending people?

MR. X. Exactly!

MR. Y. And did you become acquainted with him afterward?

MR. X. No, I didn't want to. [Pause.]

MR. Y. Would you have been willing to make his acquaintance if he had
been--punished?

MR. X. Perfectly!

(MR. Y. rises and walks back and forth several times.)

MR. X. Sit still! Why can't you sit still?

MR. Y. How did you get your liberal view of human conditions? Are you a
Christian?

MR. X. Oh, can't you see that I am not?

(MR. Y. makes a face.)

MR. X. The Christians require forgiveness. But I require punishment in
order that the balance, or whatever you may call it, be restored. And
you, who have served a term, ought to know the difference.

MR. Y. [Stands motionless and stares at MR. X., first with wild, hateful
eyes, then with surprise and admiration] How--could--you--know--that?

MR. X. Why, I could see it.

MR. Y. How? How could you see it?

MR. X, Oh, with a little practice. It is an art, like many others. But
don't let us talk of it any more. [He looks at his watch, arranges a
document on the table, dips a pen in the ink-well, and hands it to MR.
Y.] I must be thinking of my tangled affairs. Won't you please witness
my signature on this note here? I am going to turn it in to the bank at
Malmo tomorrow, when I go to the city with you.

MR. Y. I am not going by way of Malmo.

MR. X. Oh, you are not?

MR. Y. No.

MR. X. But that need not prevent you from witnessing my signature.

MR. Y. N-no!--I never write my name on papers of that kind--

MR. X.--any longer! This is the fifth time you have refused to write
your own name. The first time nothing more serious was involved than the
receipt for a registered letter. Then I began to watch you. And since
then I have noticed that you have a morbid fear of a pen filled with
ink. You have not written a single letter since you came here--only a
post-card, and that you wrote with a blue pencil. You understand now
that I have figured out the exact nature of your slip? Furthermore! This
is something like the seventh time you have refused to come with me to
Malmo, which place you have not visited at all during all this time. And
yet you came the whole way from America merely to have a look at Malmo!
And every morning you walk a couple of miles, up to the old mill, just
to get a glimpse of the roofs of Malmo in the distance. And when you
stand over there at the right-hand window and look out through the third
pane from the bottom on the left side, you can see the spired turrets of
the castle and the tall chimney of the county jail.--And now I hope you
see that it's your own stupidity rather than my cleverness which has
made everything clear to me.

MR. Y. This means that you despise me?

MR. X. Oh, no!

MR. Y. Yes, you do--you cannot but do it!

MR. X. No--here's my hand.

(MR. Y. takes hold of the outstretched hand and kisses it.)

MR. X. [Drawing back his hand] Don't lick hands like a dog!

MR. Y. Pardon me, sir, but you are the first one who has let me touch
his hand after learning--

MR. X. And now you call me "sir!"--What scares me about you is that you
don't feel exonerated, washed clean, raised to the old level, as good
as anybody else, when you have suffered your punishment. Do you care to
tell me how it happened? Would you?

MR. Y. [Twisting uneasily] Yes, but you won't believe what I say. But
I'll tell you. Then you can see for yourself that I am no ORDINARY
criminal. You'll become convinced, I think, that there are errors which,
so to speak, are involuntary--[twisting again] which seem to commit
themselves--spontaneously--without being willed by oneself, and for
which one cannot be held responsible--May I open the door a little now,
since the storm seems to have passed over?

MR. X. Suit yourself.

MR. Y. [Opens the door; then he sits down at the table and begins to
speak with exaggerated display of feeling, theatrical gestures, and a
good deal of false emphasis] Yes, I'll tell you! I was a student in the
university at Lund, and I needed to get a loan from a bank. I had no
pressing debts, and my father owned some property--not a great deal, of
course. However, I had sent the note to the second man of the two who
were to act as security, and, contrary to expectations, it came back
with a refusal. For a while I was completely stunned by the blow, for it
was a very unpleasant surprise--most unpleasant! The note was lying in
front of me on the table, and the letter lay beside it. At first my eyes
stared hopelessly at those lines that pronounced my doom--that is, not a
death-doom, of course, for I could easily find other securities, as many
as I wanted--but as I have already said, it was very annoying just
the same. And as I was sitting there quite unconscious of any evil
intention, my eyes fastened upon the signature of the letter, which
would have made my future secure if it had only appeared in the right
place. It was an unusually well-written signature--and you know how
sometimes one may absent-mindedly scribble a sheet of paper full of
meaningless words. I had a pen in my hand--[picks up a penholder from
the table] like this. And somehow it just began to run--I don't want
to claim that there was anything mystical--anything of a spiritualistic
nature back of it--for that kind of thing I don't believe in! It was
a wholly unreasoned, mechanical process--my copying of that beautiful
autograph over and over again. When all the clean space on the letter
was used up, I had learned to reproduce the signature automatically--and
then--[throwing away the penholder with a violent gesture] then I forgot
all about it. That night I slept long and heavily. And when I woke up,
I could feel that I had been dreaming, but I couldn't recall the dream
itself. At times it was as if a door had been thrown ajar, and then
I seemed to see the writing-table with the note on it as in a distant
memory--and when I got out of bed, I was forced up to the table, just as
if, after careful deliberation, I had formed an irrevocable decision to
sign the name to that fateful paper. All thought of the consequences,
of the risk involved, had disappeared--no hesitation remained--it was
almost as if I was fulfilling some sacred duty--and so I wrote! [Leaps
to his feet] What could it be? Was it some kind of outside influence, a
case of mental suggestion, as they call it? But from whom could it come?
I was sleeping alone in that room. Could it possibly be my primitive
self--the savage to whom the keeping of faith is an unknown thing--which
pushed to the front while my consciousness was asleep--together with the
criminal will of that self, and its inability to calculate the results
of an action? Tell me, what do you think of it?

MR. X. [As if he had to force the words out of himself] Frankly
speaking, your story does not convince me--there are gaps in it, but
these may depend on your failure to recall all the details--and I
have read something about criminal suggestion--or I think I have, at
least--hm! But all that is neither here nor there! You have taken your
medicine--and you have had the courage to acknowledge your fault. Now we
won't talk of it any more.

MR. Y. Yes, yes, yes, we must talk of it--till I become sure of my
innocence.

MR. X. Well, are you not?

MR. Y. No, I am not!

MR. X. That's just what bothers me, I tell you. It's exactly what is
bothering me!--Don't you feel fairly sure that every human being hides
a skeleton in his closet? Have we not, all of us, stolen and lied as
children? Undoubtedly! Well, now there are persons who remain children
all their lives, so that they cannot control their unlawful desires.
Then comes the opportunity, and there you have your criminal.--But I
cannot understand why you don't feel innocent. If the child is not held
responsible, why should the criminal be regarded differently? It is
the more strange because--well, perhaps I may come to repent it later.
[Pause] I, for my part, have killed a man, and I have never suffered any
qualms on account of it.

MR. Y. [Very much interested] Have--you?

MR. X, Yes, I, and none else! Perhaps you don't care to shake hands with
a murderer?

MR. Y. [Pleasantly] Oh, what nonsense!

MR. X. Yes, but I have not been punished,

ME. Y. [Growing more familiar and taking on a superior tone] So much the
better for you!--How did you get out of it?

MR. X. There was nobody to accuse me, no suspicions, no witnesses.
This is the way it happened. One Christmas I was invited to hunt with
a fellow-student a little way out of Upsala. He sent a besotted old
coachman to meet me at the station, and this fellow went to sleep on the
box, drove the horses into a fence, and upset the whole equipage in
a ditch. I am not going to pretend that my life was in danger. It was
sheer impatience which made me hit him across the neck with the edge of
my hand--you know the way--just to wake him up--and the result was that
he never woke up at all, but collapsed then and there.

MR. Y. [Craftily] And did you report it?

MR. X. No, and these were my reasons for not doing so. The man left
no family behind him, or anybody else to whom his life could be of
the slightest use. He had already outlived his allotted period of
vegetation, and his place might just as well be filled by somebody more
in need of it. On the other hand, my life was necessary to the happiness
of my parents and myself, and perhaps also to the progress of my
science. The outcome had once for all cured me of any desire to wake up
people in that manner, and I didn't care to spoil both my own life and
that of my parents for the sake of an abstract principle of justice.

MR. Y. Oh, that's the way you measure the value of a human life?

MR. X. In the present case, yes.

MR. Y. But the sense of guilt--that balance you were speaking of?

MR. X. I had no sense of guilt, as I had committed no crime. As a boy I
had given and taken more than one blow of the same kind, and the fatal
outcome in this particular case was simply caused by my ignorance of the
effect such a blow might have on an elderly person.

MR. Y. Yes, but even the unintentional killing of a man is punished
with a two-year term at hard labour--which is exactly what one gets
for--writing names.

MR. X. Oh, you may be sure I have thought of it. And more than one night
I have dreamt myself in prison. Tell me now--is it really as bad as they
say to find oneself behind bolt and bar?

MR. Y. You bet it is!--First of all they disfigure you by cutting off
your hair, and if you don't look like a criminal before, you are sure
to do so afterward. And when you catch sight of yourself in a mirror you
feel quite sure that you are a regular bandit.

MR. X. Isn't it a mask that is being torn off, perhaps? Which wouldn't
be a bad idea, I should say.

MR. Y. Yes, you can have your little jest about it!--And then they cut
down your food, so that every day and every hour you become conscious of
the border line between life and death. Every vital function is more or
less checked. You can feel yourself shrinking. And your soul, which was
to be cured and improved, is instead put on a starvation diet--pushed
back a thousand years into outlived ages. You are not permitted to
read anything but what was written for the savages who took part in the
migration of the peoples. You hear of nothing but what will never happen
in heaven; and what actually does happen on the earth is kept hidden
from you. You are torn out of your surroundings, reduced from your own
class, put beneath those who are really beneath yourself. Then you get
a sense of living in the bronze age. You come to feel as if you were
dressed in skins, as if you were living in a cave and eating out of a
trough--ugh!

MR. X. But there is reason back of all that. One who acts as if he
belonged to the bronze age might surely be expected to don the proper
costume.

MR. Y. [Irately] Yes, you sneer! You who have behaved like a man from
the stone age--and who are permitted to live in the golden age.

MR. X. [Sharply, watching him closely] What do you mean with that last
expression--the golden age?

MR. Y. [With a poorly suppressed snarl] Nothing at all.

MR. X. Now you lie--because you are too much of a coward to say all you
think.

MR. Y. Am I a coward? You think so? But I was no coward when I dared to
show myself around here, where I had had to suffer as I did.--But can
you tell what makes one suffer most while in there?--It is that the
others are not in there too!

MR. X. What others?

MR. Y. Those that go unpunished.

MR. X. Are you thinking of me?

MR. Y. I am.

MR. X. But I have committed no crime.

MR. Y. Oh, haven't you?

MR. X. No, a misfortune is no crime.

MR. Y. So, it's a misfortune to commit murder?

MR. X. I have not committed murder.

MR. Y. Is it not murder to kill a person?

MR. X. Not always. The law speaks of murder, manslaughter, killing
in self-defence--and it makes a distinction between intentional and
unintentional killing. However--now you really frighten me, for it's
becoming plain to me that you belong to the most dangerous of all human
groups--that of the stupid.

MR. Y. So you imagine that I am stupid? Well, listen--would you like me
to show you how clever I am?

MR. X. Come on!

MR. Y. I think you'll have to admit that there is both logic and
wisdom in the argument I'm now going to give you. You have suffered a
misfortune which might have brought you two years at hard labor. You
have completely escaped the disgrace of being punished. And here you see
before you a man--who has also suffered a misfortune--the victim of an
unconscious impulse--and who has had to stand two years of hard labor
for it. Only by some great scientific achievement can this man wipe
off the taint that has become attached to him without any fault of
his own--but in order to arrive at some such achievement, he must have
money--a lot of money--and money this minute! Don't you think that the
other one, the unpunished one, would bring a little better balance into
these unequal human conditions if he paid a penalty in the form of a
fine? Don't you think so?

MR. X. [Calmly] Yes.

MR. Y. Then we understand each other.--Hm! [Pause] What do you think
would be reasonable?

MR. X. Reasonable? The minimum fine in such a case is fixed by the law
at fifty crowns. But this whole question is settled by the fact that the
dead man left no relatives.

MR. Y. Apparently you don't want to understand. Then I'll have to speak
plainly: it is to me you must pay that fine.

MR. X. I have never heard that forgers have the right to collect fines
imposed for manslaughter. And, besides, there is no prosecutor.

MR. Y. There isn't? Well--how would I do?

MR. X. Oh, NOW we are getting the matter cleared up! How much do you
want for becoming my accomplice?

MR. Y. Six thousand crowns.

MR. X. That's too much. And where am I to get them?

(MR. Y. points to the box.)

MR. X. No, I don't want to do that. I don't want to become a thief.

MR. Y. Oh, don't put on any airs now! Do you think I'll believe that you
haven't helped yourself out of that box before?

MR. X. [As if speaking to himself] Think only, that I could let myself
be fooled so completely. But that's the way with these soft natures.
You like them, and then it's so easy to believe that they like you. And
that's the reason why I have always been on my guard against people I
take a liking to!--So you are firmly convinced that I have helped myself
out of the box before?

MR. Y. Certainly! MR. X. And you are going to report me if you don't get
six thousand crowns?

MR. Y. Most decidedly! You can't get out of it, so there's no use
trying.

MR. X. You think I am going to give my father a thief for son, my wife
a thief for husband, my children a thief for father, my fellow-workers a
thief for colleague? No, that will never happen!--Now I am going over to
the sheriff to report the killing myself.

MR. Y. [Jumps up and begins to pick up his things] Wait a moment!

MR. X. For what?

MR. Y. [Stammering] Oh, I thought--as I am no longer needed--it wouldn't
be necessary for me to stay--and I might just as well leave.

MR. X. No, you may not!--Sit down there at the table, where you sat
before, and we'll have another talk before you go.

MR. Y. [Sits down after having put on a dark coat] What are you up to
now?

MR. X. [Looking into the mirror back of MR. Y.] Oh, now I have it!
Oh-h-h!

MR. Y. [Alarmed] What kind of wonderful things are you discovering now?

MR. X. I see in the mirror that you are a thief--a plain, ordinary
thief! A moment ago, while you had only the white shirt on, I could
notice that there was something wrong about my book-shelf. I couldn't
make out just what it was, for I had to listen to you and watch you. But
as my antipathy increased, my vision became more acute. And now, with
your black coat to furnish the needed color contrast For the red back
of the book, which before couldn't be seen against the red of your
suspenders--now I see that you have been reading about forgeries in
Bernheim's work on mental suggestion--for you turned the book upsidedown
in putting it back. So even that story of yours was stolen! For tins
reason I think myself entitled to conclude that your crime must have
been prompted by need, or by mere love of pleasure.

MR. Y. By need! If you only knew--

MR. X. If YOU only knew the extent of the need I have had to face and
live through! But that's another story! Let's proceed with your case.
That you have been in prison--I take that for granted. But it happened
in America, for it was American prison life you described. Another thing
may also be taken for granted, namely, that you have not borne your
punishment on this side.

MR. Y. How can you imagine anything of the kind?

MR. X. Wait until the sheriff gets here, and you'll learn all about it.

(MR. Y. gets up.)

ME. X. There you see! The first time I mentioned the sheriff, in
connection with the storm, you wanted also to run away. And when a
person has served out his time he doesn't care to visit an old mill
every day just to look at a prison, or to stand by the window--in a
word, you are at once punished and unpunished. And that's why it was so
hard to make you out. [Pause.]

MR. Y. [Completely beaten] May I go now?

MR. X. Now you can go.

MR. Y. [Putting his things together] Are you angry at me?

MR. X. Yes--would you prefer me to pity you?

MR. Y. [Sulkily] Pity? Do you think you're any better than I?

MR. X. Of course I do, as I AM better than you. I am wiser, and I am
less of a menace to prevailing property rights.

MR. Y. You think you are clever, but perhaps I am as clever as you. For
the moment you have me checked, but in the next move I can mate you--all
the same!

MR. X. [Looking hard at MR. Y.] So we have to have another bout! What
kind of mischief are you up to now?

MR. Y. That's my secret.

MR. X. Just look at me--oh, you mean to write my wife an anonymous
letter giving away MY secret!

MR. Y. Well, how are you going to prevent it? You don't dare to have me
arrested. So you'll have to let me go. And when I am gone, I can do what
I please.

MR. X. You devil! So you have found my vulnerable spot! Do you want to
make a real murderer out of me?

MR. Y. That's more than you'll ever become--coward!

MR. X. There you see how different people are. You have a feeling that I
cannot become guilty of the same kind of acts as you. And that gives you
the upper hand. But suppose you forced me to treat you as I treated that
coachman?

[He lifts his hand as if ready to hit MR. Y.]

MR. Y. [Staring MR. X. straight in the face] You can't! It's too much
for one who couldn't save himself by means of the box over there.

ME. X. So you don't think I have taken anything out of the box?

MR. Y. You were too cowardly--just as you were too cowardly to tell your
wife that she had married a murderer.

MR. X. You are a different man from what I took you to be--if stronger
or weaker, I cannot tell--if more criminal or less, that's none of my
concern--but decidedly more stupid; that much is quite plain. For stupid
you were when you wrote another person's name instead of begging--as
I have had to do. Stupid you were when you stole things out of my
book--could you not guess that I might have read my own books? Stupid
you were when you thought yourself cleverer than me, and when you
thought that I could be lured into becoming a thief. Stupid you were
when you thought balance could be restored by giving the world two
thieves instead of one. But most stupid of all you were when you thought
I had failed to provide a safe corner-stone for my happiness. Go ahead
and write my wife as many anonymous letters as you please about
her husband having killed a man--she knew that long before we were
married!--Have you had enough now?

MR. Y. May I go?

MR. X. Now you HAVE to go! And at once! I'll send your things after
you!--Get out of here!

(Curtain.)

1902



CHARACTERS

    MATS
    KERSTI
    _The_ MOTHER _of_ KERSTI
    _The_ SOLDIER, _her father_
    _The_ VERGER, _her grandfather_
    BRITA, _the grown-up sister of_ MATS
    _The_ GRANDFATHER }
    _The_ GRANDMOTHER }
    _The_ FATHER      } _of_ MATS
    _The_ MOTHER      }
    ANNA      }
    LIT-KAREN } _younger sisters of_ MATS
    LIT-MATS, _the small brother of_ MATS
    _The_ SHERIFF
    _The_ PASTOR
    _The_ FISHERMAN
    _The_ MIDWIFE
    _The_ NECK
    _The_ CHILD IN WHITE
    _The_ MEWLER (_Mylingen_), _an apparition_
    _The_ MOCKER (_Skratten_), _a voice_
    _The_ HEADSMAN
    MATS'S RELATIVES, _called the_ MILL-FOLK
    KERSTI'S RELATIVES, _called the_ MEWLINGS (_Mylingarne_)
    FOUR BRIDESMAIDS
    SIX SERVANT-GIRLS
    TWO FIDDLERS
    TWO SOLDIERS


SCENARIO

    SCENE   I.  THE HILL PASTURE
    SCENE  II.  THE FAMILY COUNCIL AT THE MILL
    SCENE III.  THE SOLDIER'S HOUSE ON THE EVE OF THE WEDDING
    SCENE  IV.  THE WEDDING AT THE MILL
    SCENE   V.  AT THE CHURCH: THE PENANCE OF KERSTI
    SCENE  VI.  ON THE ICE OF THE LAKE

FIRST SCENE


        _A hill pasture in Dalecarlia. A hut of rough-hewn boards,
        painted red, Stands at the left. Beside it grow two birches
        with trunks that are white clear down to the ground_.

        _On the right-hand side appears a sloping hillside covered
        with spruces. The hillside is cut by a large brook forming a
        waterfall. At the foot of it is a tarn covered by water-lilies.
        The background shows a big lake bordered by blue hills. A
        church is visible across the lake_.

        _A grindstone set in a wooden frame stands in the foreground by
        the corner of the hut_.

        _It is Sunday evening, about sunset time_.

        KERSTI'S MOTHER _sits on a wooden block outside the hut,
        smoking her pipe_.

        KERSTI _enters with an alpenhorn in her hand. She stops in
        front of her_ MOTHER.


MOTHER. Where have you been all this time, daughter?

KERSTI. In the woods, mother.

MOTHER. Picking strawberries, I suppose. Your lips are so red.

KERSTI. Why did you call me, mother?

MOTHER. The woods were full of noises, child, and of stealthy
footfalls. Could it be the bear?

KERSTI. Can't tell.

MOTHER. I thought I heard the strokes of an axe, but maybe I was
mistaken.

KERSTI. The bear uses no axe, mother.

MOTHER. Why dressed up in your best, daughter?

KERSTI. It's Sunday, mother.

MOTHER. There is milk on your tucker, child. Have you been milking
May-dew or Starbright?

KERSTI. Could I but milk the stars--and the moon, O!

MOTHER. While it's night, O!

KERSTI. Day and night!

MOTHER. Night and day!--Yes, I know! Beware of the bear!

KERSTI. Do you think he would tear my pet cow?

MOTHER. Have you lost her?

KERSTI. Shall I ask Anna?

MOTHER. You had better!

KERSTI. [_Picks up her alpenhorn and sounds a melody; see musical
appendix, Melody No_. 1. _Then she sings; see Melody No_. 2]

"Too-la-loo, Ann at Boorness!
Do you see my cosset cow
Over there at your place?"

MATS. [_Answering from a distance in a dear tenor voice; see musical
appendix, Melody No_. 3]

"Too-la-loo, so I do.
Come at once:
Cosset cow is here now!"

MOTHER. What a deep voice Anna has got!

KERSTI. She has been calling her cows since the sun began to set.

MOTHER. What do you hear down there in the valley, child?

KERSTI. The big bell of the cow, the low bell of the goat....

MOTHER. Oh, no!

KERSTI. I can hear the cock crowing and the dog barking, the gun
banging and the cart clanking, and the oars saying "duck-duck" in the
rowlocks.

MOTHER. Whose cock do you mean, and whose dog?

KERSTI. The miller's.

MOTHER. What's his name? Is it Anna?

        KERSTI _looks embarrassed and does not answer_.

MOTHER. What do you see down there in the valley?

KERSTI. The water-wheel in the mill-race, the smoke from the chimney....

MOTHER. Whose chimney? The mill-folk's, I suppose?

KERSTI. It's growing dark, mother.

MOTHER. I _am_ going--before it grows still darker! [_She rises to her
feet_] This has been the longest Sunday in all my life!--What kind of a
smell is that?

KERSTI. I smell the woods; I smell the cattle; I smell the hay.

MOTHER. No, it was tattle-berries you were picking! [_For a while she
stands still, lost in thought; then she sings; see musical appendix,
Melody No_. 4]

    "The joy that was mine
    Has been turned into woe!"

KERSTI. It is growing dark, mother!

MOTHER. So I see, daughter mine. The darkness is coming down on us
heavy as a pall, and downward goes my path now--ever downward! But you
must stay to watch the curds. And trust me to see if you let the fire
go out.

KERSTI. Trust me to see that the fire won't go out, mother.

MOTHER. Good night, then. And don't forget your evening prayers!

KERSTI. Good night, mother.

MOTHER. "The joy that was mine has been turned into woe!" Don't forget
your evening prayers!

        [_She goes out to the left_.

KERSTI _opens the door of the hut. A big pot is seen hanging over the
fire, on which she puts more wood; coming out again, she looks around
to make sure that her mother is gone; then she picks up the alpenhorn
and sounds another wordless melody on it. [See musical appendix, Melody
No_. 5.]

MATS. [_Is heard singing outside, on the right-hand side; see musical
appendix, Melody No_. 6]

    "Kersti dearest,
    Kersti dearest,
    Baby sleeps in the forest."

KERSTI. [_Answers in the same way; see Melody No_. 7]

    "Dillery-dell!
    Fareth he well,
    Fareth he well
    Far in the forest?"

MATS. [_Answers as before; see Melody No_. 8]

    "Nothing to fear!
    Nothing to fear!
    Baby sleeps in his cradle here,
    Far, far, in the forest!"


KERSTI. [_Singing; see Melody No_. 9]

    "Haste to the house and milk the cows,
    And see that baby lacks nothing.
    I cannot come, must stay at home,
    Helping my folks with the baking."

MATS. [_Answers as before; see Melody No_. 10]

    "Birches nod in the blowing breeze,
    But baby slumbers in perfect peace,
    Kersti, Kersti, dearest!"

        _A strong wind springs up. The centre of the stage grows dark,
        but the sun is still shining on the tops of spruces on the
        hillside_.

        _Very faintly at first, then more and more clearly, the yells
        and cries of a gang of game beaters are heard. These are
        followed by the snapping of branches, the baying of hounds, the
        trampling of horses in trot and gallop, the cracking of guns,
        the snarling of rattles, the crashing of trees that fall, and,
        above all, the constantly rising roar of the waterfall_.

        _Finally a canon is sounded by ten hunting-horns, the first
        horn repeating its theme while the rest join in one by one.
        [See musical appendix, Melody No_. 11.]

        _Badly frightened_, KERSTI _stands staring in every direction
        while the noise lasts. When it has died away in the distance
        and the woods are silent again, she brings bunches of spruce
        branches and spreads them on the ground, covering them at last
        with a brightly coloured rag carpet. Next she fetches two young
        spruce-trees that have been stripped of branches and bark, so
        that only their tops remain green. These she places beside the
        door of the hut, one on either side. Then she goes to the tarn
        and picks a number of white water-lilies, which she binds into
        a wreath_.

        MATS _enters from the left, carrying a baby in a cradle of
        leather with straps attached to it_.


KERSTI. Baby, baby darling! Is he still asleep?

MATS. Indeed he is!

KERSTI. Bring him here, and we'll let the trees rock him.

        _They hang the cradle between the two birches that are swayed
        gently by the wind_.

KERSTI. [_Humming_] "Birches nod in the blowing breeze, but baby
slumbers in perfect peace.".... Did you hear the hunt, Mats?

MATS. No hunt at this time of day, girl!

KERSTI. But I heard it!

MATS. Hardly!--What did your mother have to say?

KERSTI. She bothered me until I thought she would bother the life out
of me.

MATS. Yes, dear, there can be no peace or happiness for us until our
union has been hallowed and our baby baptised.

KERSTI. As long as the old folk resist there can be no wedding. But we
must pray the Lord to bless our union before we give baby a name.

MATS. So we have agreed, and now it may as well be done.

KERSTI. Everything is ready, as you see.

MATS. It's well done, but--we're a sorry couple for all that, and a
sorry wedding we're having.

KERSTI. Let the Lord look into our minds and hearts, and if they hold
no evil--what matters the rest? Have you brought the Book?

MATS. I have. But are you sure, dear, that what we mean to do is not
sinful?

KERSTI. Why should it be? Don't you know that the midwife can baptise
in case of need?

MATS. Well, that's the midwife!

KERSTI. [_Putting the wreath on her head_] Let us begin!

MATS. In the name of the Lord! And may we never come to regret it!
[_They kneel on the carpet, facing each other_; MATS _takes out a
ring, which they hold between them while he is reading out of the
prayer-book_] "I, Mats Anders Larsson, take you, Kersti Margaret
Hansdaughter, to be my wedded wife, whom I will love in good days and
bad, and in token thereof I give you this ring."

KERSTI. "I, Kersti Margaret Hansdaughter, take you, Mats Anders
Larsson, to be my wedded husband, whom I will love in good days and
bad, and in token thereof I give you this ring."

        _They pray in silence for a while; then they rise and take hold
        of each other's hands, but they do not kiss each other_.

MATS. Now you are mine in the sight of God, dear, and after this we
won't mind what people may say.

KERSTI. That remains to be seen.

MATS. And what have we to eat, dear.

KERSTI. Nothing at all, Mats.

MATS. Then there is nothing left but to smoke.

        _They seat themselves on two small, three-legged stools and we
        flint and steel to light their pipes_.

MATS. [_When they have smoked a while in silence_] What was that you
said about the hunt just now?

KERSTI. I haven't the heart to tell, Mats. I haven't the heart since I
guessed what folk they were.

MATS. Better not, maybe!... Look at the cradle--going as if it could
rock itself.

KERSTI. That's the wind, Mats; the wind in the birches.

MATS. But there is no wind in the spruces over there.

KERSTI. So I see. Surely the evil ones are abroad to-night.

MATS. Don't talk of them!

KERSTI. Do you see my smoke going northward?

MATS. And mine southward!

KERSTI. The gnats are dancing....

MATS. Which means a wedding....

KERSTI. Do you think we are happier now?

MATS. Hardly!

KERSTI. Do you hear the cry of the blackcock?

MATS. A sure sign of wedding....

KERSTI. But not a single church bell to be heard MATS. It's Sunday, and
the ringing during the day has made them tired What shall we call the
little one?

KERSTI. [_In wild rebellion_] Burden and Ill-luck and Un-asked and
crown-thief....

MATS. Why crown-thief?

KERSTI. Because and because and because Even if we get a real wedding,
I can wear no crown! What should he be called? Bride-spoil, Mother-woe,
Forest-find!

MATS. Badly fares who badly does!

KERSTI. Yes, that's for you to say!

_The_ MOTHER _of_ KERSTI _appears on the hillside among the spruces and
stands looking at_ MATS _and her daughter_.

MATS. There are evil eyes about!

KERSTI. And evil thoughts.... What you brew I have to drink. What you
grind I have to bake.

        _The_ MOTHER _disappears_.

MATS. Can you tell what made our families hate each other so fiercely?

KERSTI. It had to do with land--with bought favours, and ill-gotten
gains, and corrupt judges, and--everything that's bad, bad, bad!

MATS. And then the hatred turned into liking, love, lust....

KERSTI. All of it poisoned....

MATS. How dark it turns when the hatred breaks through!

KERSTI. [_Throwing her wreath into the tarn_] Well may you say so! The
devil take the wreath, as I can't have a crown....

MATS. Don't say that!

KERSTI. We hold wedding like beggars, and rascals, and roving folk....
What is it you cannot eat or drink, but that tastes good for all that?
It's tobacco--and that's all you get for a wedding-feast! The fire
under the kettle is going out, Mats. Go and fetch some wood. It's all
the dancing there will be.

MATS. If tokens tell the truth, you were born to be a queen!

KERSTI. Maybe! Surely not to milk the cows!

MATS. And the baby, the baby, the dear little thing!

KERSTI. The poor dear! Oh, what will become of us? What can be in store
for us? Get some wood, Mats! Mother will beat me if the milk doesn't
curdle. Go, Mats!

MATS. There was a time when you served my father, KERSTI, and now it's
my turn to serve you. Because he was harsh to you, I'll be good to you!

KERSTI. Yes, Mats, you are good, but I am not. If I only were!

MATS. Try to be!

KERSTI. Try to be bad, Mats, and we'll see if you can.

MATS. You don't mean it!

KERSTI. Who can tell?--Get away from here, Mats, and hurry up! Somebody
is coming. I know her steps. It's mother!

MATS. Your mother?--And how about the baby?

KERSHI. [_Picks up the carpet and throws it across the cradle; then she
takes her sheepskin coat that has been hanging on the outside wall of
the hut and spreads it on top of the carpet_] Go, go, go!

MATS. Be careful about baby--be careful now!

        [_He goes out_.

KERSTI. Of course, of course!

MOTHER. [_Entering from the left_] Was it Anna that was here?

KERSTI. It was.

MOTHER. [_Looking hard at_ KERSTI] And she left when I came?--What a
voice she has!

KERSTI. Yes, has she not?

MOTHER. And she cut the wedding poles, too, and spread the spruce?

KERSTI. What is strange about that?

MOTHER. [_Pulling_ KERSTI _by the hair_] Storyteller, hussy,
strumpet....

KERSTI. [_Raising her hand against her_ MOTHER] Take care!

MOTHER. Will you lay hand on your own mother, you trull? Is that what
Mats has been teaching you? His father drove us from house and home,
and now you take the son in your arms, daughter mine.... O!

KERSTI. That such things can be said.... O!

MOTHER. [_Pointing to the cradle_] What have you there?

KERSTI. Clothes to be aired.

MOTHER. Small ones, I guess.

KERSTI. Not so very.

MOTHER. And inside the cradle?

KERSTI. Small wash--not for small ones.

MOTHER. The child is there!

KERSTI. What child?

MOTHER. Yours!

KERSTI. There is no such thing!

MOTHER. Will you swear?

KERSTI. I swear! May the Neck get me if I lie!

MOTHER. You shouldn't swear by the evil one.

KERSTI. I will swear by no one else!

MOTHER. [_Seating herself_] There is talk in the village.

KERSTI. Indeed?

MOTHER. A queer sort of talk.

KERSTI. No, really?

MOTHER. They say that Mats is to have the mill.

KERSTI [_Rising_] Is it true?

MOTHER. As true as it is that rashness always gets into trouble.

KERSTI. So Mats gets the mill? Then he will marry, I guess?

MOTHER. They talk of that, too.

KERSTI. Whom do you think?

MOTHER. Whoever it be that his fancy will take--the crown she must
surely be able to wear.

KERSTI. Oh!

MOTHER. Oh, indeed!--There is gold on your finger.

KERSTI. There is.

MOTHER. Are you pledged?

KERSTI. I am.

MOTHER. And the crown? [KERSTI _does not reply_] Have you lost it?

KERSTI. [_Walking back and forth restlessly_] You know, it was foretold
that I should wear a crown.

MOTHER. Stuff and nonsense! A virgin's crown is more beautiful than a
queen's. And happy is she who wears it with honour!

KERSTI. Oh!

MOTHER. And oh, indeed!--Little we had. Wrong we suffered. Badly we
fared. Alas the day!

KERSTI. Little we had, but shall have plenty! Luck is near!

MOTHER. Race against race, hating and hated; fire and water: now it's
coming to a boil.

KERSTI. Water may cool what the fire has heated. All will be well!

MOTHER. [_Rising to leave_] "The joy that was mine has been turned into
woe." [_She goes toward the right_] There is a wreath floating on the
water--where's the crown?

        [_She goes out_.

KERSTI. It will come, it will come!

NECK. [_Appears at the foot of the falls surrounded by a bright, white
light; he wears a red cap, and a silvery tunic fastened about the
waist with a green sash; he is young and fair, with blond hair that is
falling down his back; he has a fiddle of gold with a bow of silver,
and plays to his own singing; see musical appendix, Melody No_. 12] "I
am hoping, I am hoping that my Redeemer still liveth."

KERSTI. [_Who has been lost in thought, becomes aware of the_ Neck;
_when he has repeated his song twice, she remarks sneeringly_] There is
no redeemer for you, I can tell you!

        _The_ NECK _pauses for a while and looks sadly at her; then he
        repeats the same song twice again_.

KERSTI. If you'll keep quiet I'll let you play at my wedding.

        _The_ NECK _nods assent and vanishes into the rock behind the
        falls_.

MIDWIFE. [_Enters from behind the hut wearing a wide Hack cloak and a
close-fitting black hood; she carries a bag under her cloak, and she is
very careful never to let her back be seen_] Good evening, my dear. I
hope my visit is not inconvenient.

KERSTI. You are the midwife--Mrs. Larsson--are you not?

MIDWIFE. Of course, I am. It was I that helped you, my dear....

KERSTI. Oh, yes; but you promised never to speak of it.

MIDWIFE. And we won't! How--is the little one doing?

KERSTI. [_Impatiently_] Oh, well enough!

MIDWIFE. Better not be too impatient, dear....

KERSTI. Who says I am?

MIDWIFE. The snappy voice and the tap of the little foot! But now there
is gold on your finger, I see. Then I shall be asked to a wedding
shortly, I think.

KERSTI. You?

MIDWIFE. I am always at the baptism, but can never get to a
wedding--and I think it would be such fun!

KERSTI. No doubt it would!

MIDWIFE. Of all human virtues, there is one I value above the rest....

KERSTI. I don't suppose it is chastity.

MIDWIFE. What no one has, is beyond value. That which I put value on is
gratitude.

KERSTI. You were paid, were you not?

MIDWIFE. There are services that money can't pay.

KERSTI. And people you cannot get rid of.

MIDWIFE. Exactly, my dear, and of those I am one....

KERSTI. So I find.

MIDWIFE. And there is another,

KERSTI. Who can that be?

MIDWIFE. The Sheriff!

KERSTI. [_Startled_] The Sheriff?

MIDWIFE. Yes, the Sheriff. He is a very remarkable man, and I have
heard of no one who knows the law as he does, from cover to cover....
You and I could never get all that into our heads, but--there is
one chapter I have to know by heart, being a midwife.... And a
most remarkable chapter it is, with a most remarkable number of
paragraphs.... What's the matter?

KERSTI. [_Agitated_] Tell me what you know.

MIDWIFE. Nothing at all I am nothing but a poor old woman who has come
here to get lodging for the night....

KERSTI. Lodging here?

MIDWIFE. Right here.

KERSTI. Begone!

MIDWIFE. I can't be walking the woods in the dark of the night.

KERSTI. [_Threatening her with a stick_] If you won't walk, I'll make
you run.

MIDWIFE. [_Moving back a couple of steps without turning about_] Have
we got that far now? You had better leave the stick alone, or....

KERSTI. Or what?

MIDWIFE. The Sheriff, of course, and that chapter I spoke of....

KERSTI [_With the stick raised for a blow_] Go to the devil, you cursed
witch! [_The stick breaks into small pieces_.

MIDWIFE. Ha-ha! Ha-ha!

KERSTI. [_Picks up the flint and steel, and strikes fire_] In the name
of Christ and His Passion, get thee gone!

MIDWIFE. [_Turns and runs out with the galloping movement of a wild
thing; her back, which then becomes visible, looks like that of a fox
and ends in a sweeping, bushy tail; she hisses rather than speaks_]
We'll meet at the wedding, bid or unbid! And the Sheriff, too! Ad-zee!
Ad-zee! Ad-zee!

        KERSTI _takes a few faltering steps in direction of the tarn,
        as if she meant to throw herself into the water_.

        _Then she begins to walk up and down in front of the cradle.
        After a while she takes off the round Dalecarlian jacket she
        is wearing and puts it on top of the clothing already covering
        the cradle. Finally she sits down on one of the stools by the
        corner of the hut and buries her face in her hands_.

        _The grindstone begins to whirl with a hissing sound. Little
        bells, like those worn by goats, are heard ringing in the
        woods. Little white flames appear among the spruces on the
        hillside. Cow-bells are heard dose by. The_ NECK _appears as
        before and sings the same song_.

        KERSTI _rises horror-stricken and stands like a statue_.

        _Tones like those produced by a harmonica are heard from the
        tarn. Unseen by_ KERSTI, _the_ CHILD IN WHITE _emerges from
        among the water-lilies and goes to the cradle. Then all sounds
        die out. The grindstone comes to a stop. The_ NECK _disappears.
        All the will-o'-the-wisps but one go out_.

        _Still unseen by_ KERSTI, _the_ CHILD IN WHITE _rocks the
        cradle gently, puts his ear dose to it, and draws back with an
        expression of great sadness. At last he bursts into tears and
        covers his face with one arm. During this scene the beltlike
        tones from the tarn continue_.

        _The_ CHILD IN WHITE _picks several water-lilies to pieces and
        strews them on the cradle, which he finally kisses before he
        descends into the tarn again. Then the last will-o'-the-wisp
        disappears and the harmonica can no longer be heard_.

MIDWIFE. [_Enters again, carrying her bag so that it can be seen_]
Perhaps I shall be more welcome this time. Does the fair maiden care to
see the midwife now?

KERSTI. What do you bring?

MIDWIFE. [_Taking a bridal crown from her bag_] This!

KERSTI. What do you take?

MIDWIFE. [_Pointing toward the cradle_] "You see it, I see it, the
whole world sees it, and yet it is not there."[1]

KERSTI. Take it, then!

MIDWIFE. [_Goes to the cradle_] I have it. [_She takes stealthily
something from the cradle and drops it into her bag, which she then
hides under her cloak again_] Can I come to the wedding now?

KERSTI. Yes, come.

MIDWIFE. You must say that I'll be welcome.

KERSTI. That would be a lie.

MIDWIFE. You must practise....

KERSTI. Welcome, then--if you'll only leave me now!

MIDWIFE. [_Withdrawing backwards_]

    "Four that whirl and twirl;
    Eight that hurl and purl;
    Four that flip-flap in a row;
    Four that question where to go."[2]

        [_She disappears_.

MATS. [_Is heard singing triumphantly outside; see musical appendix,
Melody No_. 13] "Come, cosset, cosset, cosset; come, cosset, cosset!"

        _As_ KERSTI _hears him a happy look comes into her face, and
        she seems to swell with pride and new courage_. MATS _enters,
        with an armful of wood, looking joyful_.

KERSTI. [_Going to meet him_] Did you see anybody?

MATS. I did!--Now for the wedding! [_He dumps the wood into the hut_]
Let the kettle boil over--I am boiling, too.

KERSTI. Was it your father?

MATS. Father and mother. And I get the mill!

KERSTI. [_Showing her crown_] Do you see what I...?

MATS. Where did you get it?

KERSTI. Mother brought it for me.

MATS. Has she been here?

KERSTI. Happy as anything!

MATS. But the baby, the baby!

KERSTI. Sit down, Mats! Sit down! You know I can always find a way!

MATS. [_Seating himself_] But the baby!

KERSTI. There now!--Listen! Now, when trouble is on the wane and life
is smiling, don't you think a little patience might carry us very
far....

MATS. If only the course be straight....

KERSTI. Of course, straight and short.

MATS. What are you after?

KERSTI. If the big fish is to be hooked, the small ones must be
overlooked.

MATS. Can't you talk plainly?

KERSTI. Wait a little!

MATS. I am waiting.

KERSTI. The old folks make conditions.

MATS. Yes, I know.

KERSTI. They want a croton bride. What does that mean if not a bride
that wears a crown?

MATS. And wears it with honour!

KERSTI. With or without! What no one sees and no one knows does not
exist.

MATS. Let me think. [_He sits silent for a few moments_] All right! And
furthermore?

KERSTI. To hook what's big, you must overlook what's less.

MATS. Which does not mean the little one!

KERSTI. Do you mean to prove false?

MATS. I don't! Not to you, Kersti!

KERSTI. Suppose now--the banns have been read, the wedding is under
way, but the little one sleeps in the forest. Who will haste to the
house, and milk the cows, and see that baby lacks nothing? Who, I ask?

MATS. Well may you ask! [_He broods a while_] If we only dared.... What
was that you said?

KERSTI. Not a word.

MATS. It seems to me.... If we only dared....

KERSTI. What? Say it!

MATS. Say it yourself!

KERSTI. No, it's for you!

MATS. Somebody must take care of the little one.

KERSTI. Who?

MATS. There is only one.

KERSTI. Then it's easy to guess who!

MATS. Tell whom you mean.

KERSTI. No, you must tell.

MATS. Beside ourselves, there is only one who knows about the baby.

KERSTI. Who is that?

MATS. If you know, why don't you tell?

KERSTI. Because I want you to tell.

MATS. It's the midwife. Was that what you said?

KERSTI. I said nothing, but you did--and, as you know, I do what you
say.

MATS. I have my doubts.

KERSTI. But what you said I have done already. The baby can't stay
in the woods. It must have shelter when the nights grow cold. And if
anything should happen, then comes--the Sheriff!

MATS. The Sheriff, you say? Yes, so he does!

KERSTI. [_Leaping to her feet_] Is he coming, you say?

MATS. Yes, if something should happen.... Well, where's the midwife to
be found?

KERSTI. Would you like to call her?

MATS. I wish she were here!

KERSTI. And what do you want her to do?

MATS. Give the baby a home.

KERSTI. With whom?

MATS. With herself.

KERSTI. For how long?

MATS. Till the wedding is over.

KERSTI. But if he were taken sick while with her?

MATS. Better than have him freeze in the woods--better than have him
freeze to death! Take a look at the cradle. I think I heard him!

KERSTI. No, he's asleep....

MATS. Hush--I heard him.

KERSTI. No, you didn't!

MATS. Yes, I did. [_He rises_.

KERSTI. [_Placing herself in front of the cradle_] Don't you wake him!
If he should cry, somebody might hear.

MATS. Oh.... Do you think any one has--that your mother may have heard
him? Oh, Kersti, we should never have done what we have!

KERSTI. Undone were better!

MATS. [_Dejectedly_] We must take him to the midwife to-night. I must
go to the village.

KERSTI. I'll take him!

MATS. [_Going to the cradle_] Do!

KERSTI. But don't wake him!

MATS. Can't I bid him good night?

KERSTI. Don't touch him!

MATS. Think if I should never see him again!

KERSTI. Then it would be the will of Him whose will we cannot change.

MATS. His will be done!

KERSTI. Now you have said it!

MATS. What have I said that could please you like that?

KERSTI. That--that--you submit to the will of Him that performeth all
things.

MATS. [_Simply_] Yes, whatever may happen is His will, of course.

KERSTI. Of course!

MATS. Good night, then, Kersti dear, and good night, baby! [_He goes
out_.

KERSTI. Good night, Mats.

        KERSTI _loosens the empty cradle from its fastenings and drops
        it into the tarn, from the waters of which the_ CHILD IN WHITE
        _rises to threaten her with raised forefinger. At the sight of
        him_ KERSTI _shrinks back._ NECK. [_Appears in the same spot as
        before, but now bareheaded and carrying a golden harp, on which
        he accompanies himself; he has a threatening look as he sings;
        see musical appendix, Melody No_. 20]

    "Stilled are the waters, dark grows the sky:
    Dark grows the sky.
    Once in the world of the ages I lived,
    Blessed by the sun.
    Gone is the light,
    Conquered by night.
    Deep is my sin,
    Black as the tarn.
    Joy there is none;
    Plenty of woe.
    Torture and Shame must I name my abode:
    O!"

        _While the_ NECK _is singing_, KERSTI _hides the bridal crown
        in the hid. Then she puts out the fire under the pot. As she
        does so, the smoke pours in large quantities from the chimney,
        forming a dark background against which appear fantastically
        shaped and vividly coloured snakes, dragons, birds, etc_.

        _When_ KERSTI _comes out of the hut again, she has on a short
        Dalecarlian jacket and is carrying a bag and the alpenhorn. She
        locks the door of the hut and walks across the stage with proud
        bearing and firm steps just as the_ NECK _is singing the last
        line_.

_Curtain_.

[1] Old Swedish folk-riddle, the real solution of which is: the horizon.

[2] An old Swedish folk-riddle, the answer of which is: a carriage. The
four lines describe respectively: (1) the wheels; (2) the hoofs of the
horses; (3) their ears; (4) their eyes.



SECOND SCENE


        _The living-room of the mill. Everything is covered by white
        dust. In the background, on the right-hand side, is an open
        trap-door, showing part of the water-wheel. The end of the
        flour chute, with a bag attached to it, is protruding from the
        right wall not far from the trap-door. Near it appears a lever
        used for starting and stopping the water-wheel._

        _Large gates occupy the centre of the real wall. Heavy wooden
        shutters dose another opening farther to the left and half-way
        from the floor_.

        _In the foreground, at the right, is a huge open fireplace, in
        which a coal-fire is burning. An iron pot is hanging over the
        fire. On the left-hand side appear a bedstead, a hand-loom, a
        bobbin, a red, and a spinning-wheel. There is a door in the
        right wall_.

        _The following members of the family are seated in a circle in
        front of the fireplace: the_ GRANDFATHER; _the_ GRANDMOTHER;
        _the_ FATHER _and_ MOTHER _of_ MATS; _his sisters_, BRITA, _who
        is full-grown_, ANNA, _who is half-grown, and_ LIT-KAREN, _who
        is still a child; and his brother_, LIT-MATS, _who is also a
        mere boy. All are smoking out of small pipes with iron bowls
        and looking very serious_. BRITA _is plaiting a chain out of
        human hair_. LIT-KAREN _and_ LIT-MATS _are playing with two
        dolls_.


BRITA. [_To_ LIT-KAREN] Where did you get the doll?

LIT-KAREN. Kersti gave it to me.

BRITA. [_Taking the doll from her_] Away with it! [_To_ LIT-MATS] Where
did you get your doll?

LIT-MATS. Kersti gave it to me.

BRITA. [_Taking the doll_] Out with it!

FATHER. Hush! Hush! Grandfather is thinking. [_Silence_.

MOTHER. [_To_ BRITA] What are you doing?

BRITA. A watch-chain, but there is hardly hair enough.

MOTHER. Where can you get any?

BRITA. I know where it ought to be pulled.

MOTHER. Horses pull.

BRITA. Hens are picked, pigs give bristles, and maidens are
combed.--Combed hair is good, but cut is better.

FATHER. Hush, hush, grandfather is thinking. [_Silence_.

ANNA. [_In a low voice to_ BRITA] What is he thinking of?

BRITA. You'll hear by and by. And all will have to swallow.

ANNA. Is it about Mats? [BRITA _makes no answer_] And Kersti? Will
there be a wedding?

FATHER. Hush, hush, grandfather is thinking. [_Silence_.

ANNA. [_To_ BRITA] I'll give you some of my hair.

BRITA. Not the right colour.

ANNA. Who's got it? [BRITA _does not answer_] Is it Kersti you mean?

BRITA. Don't mention her. [_Silence_.

GRANDMOTHER. [_To_ GRANDFATHER] Have you thought it out?

GRANDFATHER. [_Who has been sitting with the Bible and the hymn-book in
his lap, lost in thought, wakes up_] I have! [_He opens the hymn-book
at haphazard and says to the others_] It is No. 278, the fourth verse:
"All at birth and death." Let us have it!

ALL. [_Read in unison like children at school_]

    "All at birth and death are equals,
    As the graveyard bones proclaim,
    Poor and rich and low and mighty
    In the end appear the same;
    And the naked new-born baby
    Brings no evidence to prove
    Whether poverty or fortune
    Will attend its fated groove."

GRANDFATHER. It is settled! "He that hath an ear, let him hear."--Is it
settled?

GRANDMOTHER. Not yet.

FATHER. Not quite.

MOTHER. The Lord beholdeth!

BRITA. What does the Scripture, say?

ANNA. "Doth God pervert judgment, or doth the Almighty pervert justice?"

LIT-KAREN. What do you want me to say?

GRANDFATHER. You must give us your advice, child, although we may not
take it. Out of the mouth of babes may come the truth.... Shall Kersti
have Mats?

LIT-KAREN. If they want each other.

GRANDFATHER. Well spoken! [_To_ LIT-MATS] And you, Lit-Mats?

LIT-MATS. [_With his fingers in his mouth_] I want my doll!

GRANDFATHER. And Mats wants his. Shall he have her?

LIT-MATS. If it is Kersti, he may, for she gave me the doll.

BRITA. Listen to him!

GRANDFATHER. Let us search the Scripture. [_He opens the Bible and
reads_] Genesis, thirty-fourth chapter and eighth verse. "And Hamor
communed with them, saying, The soul of my son Shechem longeth for your
daughter: I pray you give her him to wife." Is that enough?

GRANDMOTHER. Enough and to spare!

FATHER. There wasn't anything about the mill.

MOTHER. Let His will be done!

BRITA. [_Abruptly_] Amen.

ANNA. Verily, it shall be done!

LIT-KAREN. I like Kersti because she's nice.

LIT-MATS. Me, too!

FATHER. Hush, hush, grandfather is thinking. [_Silence_.

GRANDFATHER. [_To_ FATHER] Ask your brother-in-law to come in.

        _The_ FATHER _goes to the door in the background, where he
        stops_.

GRANDFATHER. [_Goes to the bed, pulls a box from under it, takes a
bundle of papers from the box, and turns to the_ FATHER _again_] Let
him come!

FATHER. [_Opening the door in the background_] Come in, Stig Matsson.

SHERIFF. [_Enters, dressed in uniform_] The peace of God be with you!

ALL. [_Rising_] And his blessing on you!

GRANDFATHER. It is I who have called you, Stig Matsson, and you know
the reason. Kersti Margaret Hansdaughter--[_He sighs_]--is to become
the wife of Mats Anders Larsson, my grandson. The two families have
fought and fumed at each other for a long time--all too long! At
this late hour I have come to feel that an end should be put to all
strife and ill will before my eyes are closed and I am carried to my
last rest. Take a look at these papers. [_He hands the bundle to the_
SHERIFF, _who opens it and glances at some of the papers_] They are
legal documents, deeds, wills, receipts, authorisations--belonging to
suits that have been settled or are still unsettled. Have you looked
them over?

SHERIFF. I have.

GRANDFATHER. [_Takes back the bundle_] All right! Then I shall throw
them into the fire. There is a time to hate and a time to love. The
time of hatred must come to an end I am longing for peace. Therefore,
I beg you, my next of kin, to regard all that has happened in the
past as if it had not happened at all--and I ask you: Will you forget
everything, and will you meet your new relatives without grudge or
guile, and greet them as friends? Answer me!

ALL. We will!

GRANDFATHER. Then I shall let the fire consume what is left of past
evils. [_He throws the bundle of papers into the fire, pulls the iron
lid in front of the grate, and opens three small ventilators in the
lid_] Let us be seated!

        _All seat themselves in front of the fireplace, staring at the
        red glare from the three ventilators_.

ANNA. [_To_ BRITA, _in a low voice_] Do you hear it sing?

BRITA. No, it moans. And within me it's aching!

        _The_ GRANDFATHER _rises. Then all the rest follow his example_.

GRANDFATHER. [_To the_ FATHER] Bring them in!

        _The_ FATHER _goes to the door at the right and brings in_ MATS.

        _The_ MOTHER _goes to the door in the rear and opens it_.
        KERSTI _enters, accompanied by her_ MOTHER, _her father, the_
        SOLDIER, _who is wearing the old full-dress uniform of the
        Swedish infantry of the line, and her grandfather, the_ VERGER.

GRANDFATHER. May God bless you! And be seated, please!

        _All seat themselves except_ MATS, KERSTI, _and the_ SHERIFF.
        MATS _has taken hold of_ KERSTI _by both hands. Long silence_.

GRANDFATHER. When is the wedding to be?

MATS. In a fortnight, as soon as the banns have been read the third
time.

GRANDFATHER. What is the hurry?

        KERSTI _shows evidence of being offended_.

MATS. Haven't we waited long enough?

GRANDFATHER. Maybe you have!

MATS. [_To his relatives_] Have you no word to say to Kersti? [_Pause_]
Not one of you?

SHERIFF. [_Goes to_ KERSTI _and takes her by the hands with evident
friendliness_] Let us welcome the new child!

        _Panic-stricken_, KERSTI _tries to tear herself loose_.

SHERIFF. You are not afraid of me, are you?--Oh, no!--Look me in the
face, Kersti. I have dandled you on my knees when you were a little
child, and I have held your pretty head in my hands.... Yes, you have a
very pretty head, and a forehead that makes me think of a bull. That's
why you are having your own way now, I suppose.

        [_He lets go of her_.

GRANDFATHER. Let us leave the young ones alone!

        _Alt rise, walk past_ MATS _and_ KERSTI, _and disappear through
        the door in the rear_.

BRITA. [_Who is the last to leave, spits scornfully as she passes_
KERSTI] Fie!

MATS. [_Spitting in the same way_] Fie yourself!

        KERSTI _and_ MATS _are left alone_.

MATS. I hope you will feel at home with me, Kersti!

KERSTI. With you, yes!

MATS. What have you to do with the others?

KERSTI. That's the question.

MATS. You are not marrying the family.

KERSTI. But into it.

MATS. Of course, we are not very soft or cuddlesome.

KERSTI. That's plain.... Is this the place where we are to live?

MATS. Yes, what do you think of it?

KERSTI. Everything is white....

MATS. It's the flour, you see. Do you object?

KERSTI. And damp....

MATS. It's the mill-race....

KERSTI. And cold, too....

MATS. It's the water....

KERSTI. Shall we have new furniture?

MATS. There will be nothing new. Everything is handed down from one
generation to another.

KERSTI. But we can sweep, can't we?

MATS. No, we can't! The dust in a mill is like the coating in a pipe.
Mustn't be touched!

KERSTI. Is that the wheel?

MATS. That's the wheel.

        _He pulls the lever, whereupon the rushing of the water through
        the race is heard, and the wheel begins to turn_.

KERSTI. Ugh! Have we to listen to that noise?

MATS. It's ours! And we should be thankful as long as we hear it,
because that means we have grist for the mill.

KERSTI. And the sun never gets here?

MATS. Never! How could it?

KERSTI. And nothing grows here--except that green stuff on the wheel.

MATS. But we catch eels here and lampreys.

KERSTI. Ugh! I like it better in the pasture, where the wind is
blowing....

MATS. And the birches rock....

KERSTI. [_Covering her face with the apron and weeping_] Must I live in
a place like this, beneath the water, at the bottom of the sea?

MATS. I was born here.

KERSTI. And here we are to die--O!

MATS. Why "O"?

KERSTI. Stop the wheel at least.

MATS. Well, if you can't get along with the wheel, then....

KERSTI. [_Opening a trap-door in the floor_] What's down here?

MATS. The river.

KERSTI. Please stop that wheel!

MATS. [_Labours with the lever, but is unable to stop the wheel]_ Well!
There must be mischief abroad!--It won't stop!

KERSTI. I shall die here!

MATS. I must go outside to stop it! There is mischief abroad, I tell
you!

KERSTI. And at home?

MATS. Oh, dear!

KERSTI. "Meow, said the cat."[1]

MATS. What is the matter?

KERSTI. Merely that I have got what I wanted.

MATS. And it was not worth having? [_The noise made by the wheel has
become, deafening, and the wheel itself has begun to turn in the
opposite direction_] Christ Jesus, help! The wheel is turning backward!

        [_He runs out through the rear door_.

        KERSTI _remains alone_.

        _The handloom starts. The bobbin, the reel, and the
        spinning-wheel begin to turn, each one in its own manner. The
        stage becomes brightly illumined as if with sunlight. Then
        the room turns very dark. The fireplace swings around so that
        the glare from the ventilators confronts_ KERSTI _like three
        burning eyes. It looks as if the fireplace were chasing her.
        Then it drops back into its accustomed place. The roar of the
        water-wheel increases again. The_ NECK _appears in the wheel
        with the red cap on his head, and the golden fiddle in his
        hand. Be sings and plays as before, repeating the brief tune
        several times_.

        NECK. "I am hoping, I am hoping, that my Redeemer still liveth!"

        KERSTI. [_Running out through the rear door_] Mats, Mats!

        _The_ NECK _disappears, but his song is still heard for a
        while, as it gradually dies away in the distance_.

MIDWIFE. [_Enters, opens the small trap-door in the floor, and drops
her leather bag through it_] "If you come back, it's all off, and if
you don't, it's all on!" Now that's done! And I shall dance at the
wedding!

        _She takes some dance steps, but without letting her back be
        seen. The hand-loom begins to rap in waltz time, accompanied by
        the bobbin, the reel, and the spinning-wheel. Then the_ MIDWIFE
        _disappears through the rear door, showing her back with the
        fox tail for a brief moment. The handloom, the bobbin, the
        reel, and the spinning-wheel keep right on as before_.

        KERSTI _enters, and at once everything stops. A moment later
        the_ VERGER _enters_.

KERSTI. Is that you, grandfather?

VERGER. Yes, girl, I forgot something.

        _He picks up a large leather bag which he dropped on the bed at
        his first entrance_.

KERSTI. What have you there?

VERGER. I come from the sacristy, and I am taking home the numbers to
be polished.

KERSTI. What numbers?

VERGER. Those that show the hymns you are to sing, don't you know?

KERSTI. Let me see!

VERGER. [_Takes out of his bag a small black board, such as is found
in every Swedish church; it has a number of nails on which are hung
numbers made of brass_] Here you can see.... What's the matter,
sweetheart?

KERSTI. I don't know, grandfather, but I think I should never have come
here....

VERGER. What talk is that, child?

KERSTI. There is mischief astir in this house....

VERGER. Oh, mercy, no...; No, my dear....

KERSTI. Oh, oh, oh! Everything has grown so strange all of a sudden....

VERGER. But how is this going to end, Kersti?

KERSTI. Yes, tell me, tell me!

VERGER. I must go now, child. I must go back to the church and get the
crown so I can send it to a goldsmith. It has to be cleaned with cream
of tartar....

KERSTI. All right, grandfather....

VERGER. It is for your sake the crown is to be cleaned--for your own
sake, don't you know?...

        [_He goes out by the rear door_.

        _The_ SOLDIER _enters immediately afterward_.

KERSTI. Is that you, father?

SOLDIER. Yes, it's only me. I want my chaco, which I left in here.

        [_He picks up the chaco_.

KERSTI. Oh, father, father, I am so unhappy....

SOLDIER. [_Drily_] What has happened?

KERSTI. Nothing!

SOLDIER. Why should you be unhappy, then?

KERSTI. You don't understand!

SOLDIER. [_Brusquely, as he adjusts the chin-strap of the chaco_] Come
to your senses, child!

KERSTI. Don't go, father!

SOLDIER. The sorrows of love pass quickly--Come to your senses is my
advice. Do come to your senses! [_He goes out._

        BRITA _enters_.

KERSTI. And what have _you_ forgotten?

BRITA. I never forget anything.

KERSTI. What are you looking for?

BRITA. You!

KERSTI. How kindly!

BRITA. Yes, is it not?

KERSTI. You hateful thing!

BRITA. You hussy!

KERSTI. You--sister-in-law!

BRITA. Who knows?

KERSTI. Are you telling my fortune, you witch?

BRITA. Yes--a rope!

KERSTI. Should not be mentioned in the house of a hanged man!

BRITA. [_Goes to the bag attached to the end of the flour chute_] Now
I shall tell your fortune! You get the mill, and the grist will be
accordingly. [_She takes from the bag a handful of black mould out of
which she forms a small mound on the floor; then she says_]

    "Vagrant women
    Grind for their men
    Meal out of mould
    As only food."[1]

KERSTI. A witch you are, indeed!

BRITA. Yes, and one who can find buried treasures! Perhaps you will let
me find a little treasure for you?

KERSTI. Take care, you witch! Have you no shame? It's mortal sin you
are practising now! You should be burned by fire, for I am sure you
would float if thrown in the water!

BRITA. [_Taking a pinch of mould from the bag and pouring it on_
KERSTI'S _head_] To the dust I wed you, and a crown of dirt shall you
wear, so that your shame may find you out!

KERSTI. Fie on you! Fie!

VOICE. [_Like that of a small child, repeats after her_] Fie!

KERSTI. Who was that?

VOICE. Who was that?

BRITA. Guess!--That was the Mocker!

KERSTI. Who is the Mocker?

VOICE. The Mocker!

BRITA. The Mocker is the Mocker. Don't you know the Mewler?

KERSTI. The Mewler, you say? What have I got to do with that one?

VOICE. With that one!

BRITA. The wages of sin is death!

KERSTI. [_Calling through the door_] Mats!

VOICE. Mats!

KERSTI. [_In despair_] Oh! Oh! [_She unfastens one of her red garters
and ties it about her own neck_] Let me die! Let me die!

BRITA. You shall have your wish!

KERSTI. Hang me to a tree!

VOICE. To a tree!

BRITA. Not I!

MATS. [_Is heard singing outside_] "Kersti dear, is baby asleep?"

BRITA. "Far in the forest!" Fie on you! [_She goes out_.

MATS. [_Enters, looking very happy_] "Far, far, in the forest!" [_He
comes up behind_ KERSTI _and puts his hands over her eyes_] Guess who
it is!

KERSTI. Oh, you hurt me!

MATS. [_Taking hold of the garter which is still about the neck of_
KERSTI] What kind of necklace is this?

KERSTI. Let go!

MATS. [_Pulling playfully at the garter_] Now I have you! Now you are
my prisoner, my dove, my goat that I bought for a groat! [_He leads
her about by the garter_] My little white kid! My little pet cow!
[_Singing_] "Come, cosset, cosset, cosset! Come, cosset, cosset!"

KERSTI. Yes, you can be happy, Mats!

MATS. I am, and guess why?

KERSTI. Can't any longer!

MATS. Because I met the midwife, and she brought word of the little one.

KERSTI. Did she?

MATS. She did! He's sleeping, she said, so quietly, so quietly.

KERSTI. Oh!

MATS. Far in the forest!--What's that in your hair?

KERSTI. Mould.

MATS. Have you been buried?

KERSTI. Yes, already!

MATS. [_Brushing the mould out of her hair_] Ugh! Who did that?

KERSTI. Can't you tell?

MATS. Brita with the evil eye?

KERSTI. Can't you blind it?

MATS. Not I! The only one who can is Jesus Christ!

        _A church-bell sounds the call to even-song_.

KERSTI. Fray for me!

MATS. One must do that for oneself.

KERSTI. But suppose you can't?

MATS. You can if your conscience is clear.

KERSTI. But when _is_ it?

MATS. Do you hear the even-song bell?

KERSTI. No!

MATS. But I do; so you must hear it, too.

KERSTI. I don't, I don't! Alas the day!

MATS. Can you hear the rapids?

KERSTI. The roar of the rapids, the beat of the flail, the tinkle of
cowbells--but of holy bells not a sound!

MATS. That's a bad sign! I remember when the bells were rung at the
burial of our former sheriff--we could see them move, but not a sound
was heard. A bad sign!

KERSTI. Brita put a spell on me!

MATS. It will be worst for herself.

KERSTI. Come to the pasture! I must see the sun!

MATS. I will--Kersti dear!

KERSTI. Oh!

MATS. [_Putting his arms about her and pressing her head to his
breast_] Oh!

_Curtain_.


[1] Part of an old saw, the rest of which reads as follows: "when it
was spanked for licking up the cream."



THIRD SCENE


        _The eve of the wedding. The house of_ KERSTI'S _parents_.

        _Above the door in the rear hangs a smalt tin plate on
        which are painted the_ SOLDIER'S _regimental number and the
        coat-of-arms of Dalecarlia. There is a window on either side
        of the door, both filled with potted plants. The floor is of
        pine boards, full of knot-holes and nail-heads, but scrubbed
        immaculately dean_.

        _Half-way down the left wall is an open fireplace with a hood.
        On the same side, nearer the footlights, stands a wooden seat
        covered with brightly coloured home-made draperies_.

        _Against the opposite wall stands a chest of drawers surmounted
        by a mirror, over which a white veil has been draped. A pair of
        candlesticks and a few simple ornaments are arranged in front
        of the mirror. A table and a wooden seat are placed between the
        chest and the footlights. On the wall above this seat hangs
        the_ SOLDIER'S _old-fashioned musket, with stock of birch wood,
        stained yellow, red leather sling, and percussion-lock. His
        chaco, cartridge-case, and white bandoleer with bayonet are
        grouped around the musket. Below appears a portrait of King
        Charles XV of Sweden in full uniform_.

        _A landscape with stacks of sheaves in the fields can be seen
        through the windows and the open door in the rear_.

        _When the curtain rises, a maid servant is at work by the
        fireplace scouring and polishing copper pans, iron pots, and
        coffee-kettles_.

        _The_ VERGER _is seated at the table on the right-hand side
        engaged in polishing the brass numbers of the hymn-board,
        which is lying on the table beside him. There lies also the
        collection-bag of red velvet with embroideries in silver and
        a small bell attached to the bottom of it for the rousing of
        sleeping worshippers_.

        _The_ SOLDIER, _in undress uniform and forage-cap, is seated at
        the same table, looking over some papers on which he is making
        notes with a pencil, the point of which he wets from time to
        time_.

        LIT-KAREN _and_ LIT-MATS _stand beside the table, with their
        chins resting on the edge of it, watching the_ VERGER. _Their
        eyes are agog, and their fingers in their mouths. The_ VERGER
        _smiles at them and strokes their hair from time to time. The_
        MOTHER _is standing by the fireplace drying a couple of towels.
        As the curtain rises, the merry singing of girls is heard from
        the outside, but the atmosphere in the room is oppressive, and
        everybody is trying to lose himself in what he has at hand,
        forgetful of the rest_.


GIRLS. [_Singing outside; see musical appendix, Melody No_. 14]

    "When I was a little lassie, herding on the hill,
    One day I lost the bell-cow and Gossamer, too.
    I stood upon a rock and called and cried with a will,
    Till I heard Gossamer begin to moo
    In a pasture far, far away.
    'Hush,' said Pine-tree,
    'She will surely find thee,'
    Hemlock told me not to stumble;
    Willow asked me not to grumble;
    Birch-tree said I could not hope to miss a spanking."

SOLDIER. [_Looks up from his work and remarks phlegmatically to the_
MOTHER] Say, Mother!

MOTHER. We-ell?

SOLDIER. Was it three quarters we got off the place last year?

MOTHER. Yes, that's right.

VERGER. Haven't the girls come out of the bath yet?

MOTHER. No.... This business of the wedding takes a lot of people....
We should be bringing in the oats.... And it will soon be time to pick
berries....

VERGER. Yes, the dog-days are most over. You can see it on the flies;
they're kind of drowsy.... Will there be a lot of berries this year?

MOTHER. Yes. [_Silence_.

SOLDIER. Will those girls never come back?

MOTHER. I don't know what can be keeping them so long.

SOLDIER. It's hot.

VERGER. It must be bad in camp.

SOLDIER. Well, it isn't so very hard on the infantry....

VERGER. You were lucky to get leave.

SOLDIER. I guess I was!

MOTHER. Now they are coming.

SOLDIER. Did you see that they had something to eat and drink?

MOTHER. Yes, right in the bath, and plenty of it. [_Silence_.

        _The girls are heard outside, talking and laughing_. KERSTI
        _enters first, white-faced, with her wet hair streaming down
        her back. She is followed by_ BRITA, ANNA, _and the four
        bridesmaids_, ELSA, RICKA, GRETA, _and_ LISA. _The maids are
        carrying jars and wine-glasses which they put down by the
        fireplace_. KERSTI, BRITA, _and_ ANNA _carry long bath-towels
        with coloured borders, which they hang up by the door_.

        _The_ MOTHER _puts a chair in the middle of the floor and
        makes_ KERSTI _sit on it_. KERSTI'S _hair having first been
        carefully dried with towels, the_ MOTHER _begins to comb
        it. The maids duster on the bench at the left_. BRITA _seats
        herself so that she can stare at_ KERSTI. _No greetings are
        exchanged, and no emotion of any hind is shown_.

MOTHER. Give me the mirror.

KERSTI. Don't! I don't want any mirror.

BRITA. You ought to look at yourself, as you won't let anybody else see
you.

KERSTI. What do you mean?

BRITA. Hard to tell, isn't it?--Nice hair you've got. Can I have it, if
it should come off?

KERSTI. No, you can't!

MOTHER. What would you do with it?

BRITA. Watch-chain for Mats.

MOTHER. [_To her daughter_] Won't you let Mats have it?

KERSTI. No, I won't!

BRITA. [_Taking from her skirt-bag the same piece of work on which she
was employed in the previous scene_] I'll never be able to match the
colour.

KERSTI. You can have it when I am dead.

BRITA. That's a promise, but will you keep it?

KERSTI. I will! [_Silence_.

SOLDIER. Say, Mother.... Please keep quiet a while, children.... Do you
know if the sergeant has been asked?

MOTHER. Vesterlund? Of course!

SOLDIER. It's to be at four o'clock in the church, isn't it?

MOTHER. That's right.

SOLDIER. [_Putting his papers together_] Then I'll go and see the
Pastor now.... And I'll go right on to the sexton.... [_To himself_]
Hm-hm! That was that! Hm-hm!

        [_He goes out pensively without greeting anybody. Silence_.

VERGER. Now, my dears, I hope you won't touch anything.

LIT-KAREN. I'll look after Lit-Mats and see that he doesn't.

VERGER. So you're going to look after him, are you?

MOTHER. Where are you going, father?

VERGER. To the store to get the crown, which should be back from the
city by this time.

BRITA. [_Sneeringly_] Oh--the crown!

VERGER. [_Rising_] The goldsmith has had it, you know--to clean it with
cream of tartar. That's what you do with silver: you boil it in cream
of tartar.

BRITA. [_As before_] Ha-ha!

MOTHER. [_To the_ Verger] Wait a moment, and I'll go along to the store.

VERGER. Is it safe to leave the children alone?

BRITA. What do you fear might happen?

MOTHER. Why, they are grown-up people!

BRITA. And Kersti likes to be alone for that matter. She can't stand
having anybody look at her....

MOTHER. Now, now!

BRITA. When she is bathing, she doesn't want any company at all. But,
of course, she's grown-up, so she doesn't have to be afraid....

        KERSTI _is turning and twisting to escape the stare of BRITA_.

MOTHER. Keep still, girl!

BRITA. No, she's no longer any child. She's outgrown that, and a lot
more. Perhaps the crown won't fit her even? Have you tried it on?

VERGER. [_Quietly_] That's what we are going to do in a little while.

        _He goes out accompanied by the_ MOTHER. _Silence_.

        KERSTI _seats herself at the table on the right-hand side and
        begins to play with the brass numbers_.

BRITA. [_Pursuing_ KERSTI _with her stare_] A merry wedding eve, isn't
it?

KERSTI. Do you want to play games?

BRITA. We might play "papa and mamma and the children."

KERSTI. Would you like to guess riddles?

BRITA. I have already guessed....

KERSTI. Or sing?

BRITA. "Hush-a-bye, baby," I suppose you mean?... No, let us read the
Bible.

KERSTI. The Bible, you say?

BRITA. Yes--Genesis, thirty-fourth and eight.

KERSTI. About Shechem, you mean?

BRITA. Exactly, and about Dinah, for whom his heart was longing.... Do
you know who Dinah was?

KERSTI. She was the daughter of Jacob and Leah.

BRITA. That's right. And do you know what she was?

KERSTI. Is that a riddle?

BRITA. Not at all. Do you know what she was?

KERSTI. No.

BRITA. She was a little--spoiled!

KERSTI. Is that a play on words?

BRITA. More than that!

        KERSTI _lets her head fall forward as if wishing to hide her
        face_.

BRITA. Do you understand? [_Pause_] Is Mrs. Larsson the only one _you_
have asked?

KERSTI. Have I asked?... The midwife, you say?

BRITA. Well, so she says.

KERSTI. Then she is lying!

BRITA. As midwife she has been sworn, although I couldn't tell whether
her oath be false or fair. Just now she swears that she doesn't lie.

        KERSTI _lets her head droop again_.

BRITA. Hold up your head! Can't you look people in the face?

KERSTI. [_To the other girls_] Say something, girls! [_Silence_.

BRITA. It's hard to say anything when one has seen nothing. But
nevertheless--one knows what one knows!

SHERIFF. [_Appearing in the doorway_] I am making free.... It won't matter
if an old fellow like me gets in to the girls--although the boys have
to keep out!

BRITA. [_Shaking her fist in the face of_ KERSTI] But you'll never wear
the crown!

KERSTI. You don't say!

        BRITA _goes out_.

        _The_ SHERIFF _pulls up a chair and sits down beside_ KERSTI.

        _The girls sneak out of the room one by one_. LIT-MATS _stays
        behind, clinging to the skirt of_ KERSTI.

        _It is plain that the intentions of the_ SHERIFF _are kindly,
        and so are his words, but the more discreet he tries to be,
        the more awkward he becomes, and so all his words assume an
        ambiguous meaning_.

SHERIFF. [_Taking one of_ KERSTI'S _hands and looking her straight in
the eyes_] What sort of a bride is this, looking so sad when she is
getting her heart's desire? What is the matter?

KERSTI. With what?

SHERIFF. Is that the way to answer an old friend who will be a kinsman
by this hour to-morrow? There is more than one lass who envies you, and
who would like to get to the altar ahead of you to-morrow.

KERSTI. Maybe there is.

SHERIFF. And there is the new life ahead of you, in mill and kitchen.
No more running about in the woods, where "birches nod in the blowing
breeze." No more dancing in the barns on Saturday nights. You'll be
busy 'tending your pots, and watching the cradle, and having the meals
on the table when Mats comes home, and--keeping an even temper when the
dark days arrive--for after sunshine there is sure to be a little rain.
Does it scare you to find life so serious, dear? It isn't as bad as it
looks. It merely helps to make life kind of solemn.

KERSTI. Oh!

SHERIFF. What are you oh-ing about, girl?--There seems to be something
in the air that has no place in the thoughts of a young girl--something
amiss. Now, my dear, let me see if I can't straighten it out.
[_Jestingly_] The guardian of the law knows how to get the truth out of
all sorts of people. What's on your mind, dear? Has Mats been nasty to
you?

KERSTI. Oh, mercy!

SHERIFF. Has the family been playing the high-and-mighty? What have you
to do with the family anyhow?

        LIT-MATS _climbs into the lap of_ KERSTI, _puts his arms about
        her, nestles up to her as close as he can get, and falls
        asleep_.

SHERIFF. Look at that little chap now! He likes his sister-in-law, and
that's a good sign. Children always know their real friends. Are you
fond of children, Kersti?

KERSTI. [_Suspiciously_] Why do you ask?

SHERIFF. That's not the right kind of an answer!... Don't you think
it's nice to have a little thing like that--to hold it on your lap
and feel how it trusts you--just as if there could never be any harm
or deceit in the bosom that shelters it.... I think he's falling
asleep. Helpless as he is, he's not afraid of trusting his sleep to a
stranger--who means nothing but well by him, I am sure.

KERSTI. Have you seen anything of Mats?

SHERIFF. He was busy with the boys making the mill ready for the dance
to-morrow. [_Silence_] It's some time since we saw a crown bride in
this place.

KERSTI. Is that so?

SHERIFF. Yes, indeed. The old ways are gone, and new ones have come
in--from the cities and the camps....

KERSTI. [_Pertly_] They used to blame the fellows who came to buy the
timber.

SHERIFF. Yes, but if it hadn't been for them, there would have been no
mill....

KERSTI. They are always putting the blame on somebody else....

SHERIFF. You are getting a nice husband, Kersti....

KERSTI. Yes, he's fine--too fine for me!

SHERIFF. That's a bitter answer to a kind word!

KERSTI. There was nothing bitter about it--nothing but the truth....

SHERIFF. Why should it be so hard for us to understand each other? It
looks almost as if you didn't want us to be friends?

KERSTI. Why do you think so?

SHERIFF. What is well meant, you take badly, and the other way around.
Well--that happens frequently when there is something amiss.

KERSTI. What's amiss?

SHERIFF. I don't know.

KERSTI. Neither do I, but it isn't customary to say things like that to
a young girl.

SHERIFF. Now, now!--Where there's no sick conscience, you don't have to
walk in your stocking feet--but, but, but....

KERSTI. Has the examination begun already?

SHERIFF. I didn't mean....

KERSTI. The--"guardian of the law" doesn't know how to talk to ladies.

SHERIFF. [_Sharply_] Kersti!

KERSTI. What is it?

SHERIFF. [_Looking hard at her_] What do you mean? KERSTI. What do you
mean yourself?

SHERIFF. Lo and behold! That's just the kind of questions asked by _my_
ladies when they want to find out whether I know anything.

KERSTI. What could there be to know?

SHERIFF. Whew--is the wind in that corner? Well, well! [_Silence_]
Well--I guess I'll be going! Yes, I had better be going!

        _He goes out by the rear door, stepping very softly and putting
        his forefinger across his lips as if meaning to enforce silence
        on himself_.

        KERSTI, _left alone, kisses the head of the sleeping_ LIT-MATS.

        MATS _appears at the right-hand window_.

        _The twilight has come, but it is the lingering, luminous
        twilight of the northern summer night_.

MATS. Hey!

KERSTI. Mats! Oh, come here!

MATS. I mustn't come in--I have promised.

KERSTI. Yes, do!

MATS. No, no!--Is the little one asleep?

KERSTI. This one--yes!--Hush! Hush!

        _A bugle-call is faintly heard in the distance. It is the
        summons to evening service in the camp of the regiment to
        which_ KERSTI'S _father belongs. (See the musical appendix,
        Melody No_. 15.)

KERSTI. [_Scared_] Are they hunting again?

MATS. No, who would be hunting at this time of day?

KERSTI. What is it?

MATS. A soldier's daughter you are, and don't know!

KERSTI. Tell me!

MATS. That's at the camp, you know. They are calling them to evening
prayers.

KERSTI. Of course--but everything seems strange and confused!

MATS. Come to the window, Kersti.

KERSTI. I think.... I'll just put the little one away.

MATS. The little one, you say?

KERSTI. [_Rises very carefully and carries_ LIT-MATS _to the bench by
the fireplace, where she pulls him down and covers him up_] Hushaby,
hushaby!

        _The singing of a hymn in unison is heard from the camp_.
        KERSTI _kneels beside the bench and tries to pray, bid merely
        wrings her hands in despair. At last she kisses the shoes of
        the sleeping child, struggles to her feet, and goes to window_.

MATS. There is something nice about children, isn't there?

KERSTI. Yes--yes!

MATS. Are you alone?

KERSTI. Yes, they left! Hating me--all of them!

MATS. To-morrow is our wedding-day!

KERSTI. Yes--think of it!

MATS. Yes, think of it--to-morrow is our wedding-day!

KERSTI. And I shall be living in the mill!

MATS. In the mill with me!

KERSTI. Till death us do part!

MATS. Which won't be soon!

KERSTI. Oh!

_Curtain_.



FOURTH SCENE


        _The wedding. The living-room at the mill has been cleared
        for the occasion. The big doors in the rear stand wide open.
        Through the doorway is seen a large loft, where a number
        of tables have been spread for the impending feast, of
        which coffee is to form one of the principal features. The
        shutters covering the rectangular opening to the left of the
        main doorway are also open, disclosing a table with several
        candlesticks on it. On this table the fiddlers subsequently
        take up their position_.

        _The opening to the water-wheel appears to the right of the
        main door. The hand-loom, the bobbin, the reel, and the
        spinning-wheel have disappeared_.

        _On the floor, beneath the place reserved for the fiddlers,
        stands the "old men's table," with a full equipment of jugs,
        mugs, pipes, and playing-cards_.

        _A number of chairs and benches occupy the middle of the floor,
        and on these are spread clean white sheets, pillow-cases, and
        towels for drying_.

        _As the curtain rises, six servant-girls are busily grinding
        coffee on as many hand-mills, while from the outside are heard
        the ringing of church-bells and a bridal march played on
        violins. When the coffee is ground, the girls begin to gather
        up the linen and sing while they are doing so_.

        GIRLS. [_Singing; see musical appendix, Melody No_. 16]

    "Dillery-deering!
    Twelve in the clearing:
    Twelve men glare at me,
    Twelve swords flare at me.
    Kine they are slaughtering;
    Sheep they are quartering;
    Naught but my life they're leaving:
    Dillery-deering!"


        _The bridal procession is drawing near. The girls put the
        benches and chairs where they belong and go out with their
        burdens of linen_.

        _The stage is left empty for a few moments, all the sounds
        previously heard having died out_.

        _Then the song of the_ NECK _is heard from the water-wheel,
        while he himself remains unseen_.

NECK. [_Singing outside_] "I am hoping, I am hoping, that my Redeemer
still liveth."

        _The trap-door in the floor is raised and the_ MEWLER _ascends
        from the hole: a blurred mass of white veils beneath which
        the outlines of a small infant in long clothes are barely
        discernible. This apparition remains hovering above the opening
        in the floor_.

        _Then the bridal march is again heard outside. The song of
        the_ NECK _ceases, and the_ MEWLER _disappears, the trap-door
        falling back into its wonted position_.

        _The bridal procession enters the room. First come the
        fiddlers, then the bridesmaids and bridesmen. After these come
        the bride and the groom, and then follow the_ PASTOR, _the
        parents of the couple, the members of both families, friends,
        and young people. Everybody seems depressed, and the entrance
        is made in gloomy silence_.

        _The bride is led to a chair in the middle of the floor, placed
        so that she must face the trap-door in the floor. She is very
        pale and does not look up at all. The guests pass in front of
        her as in review. Now and then one stops and says a few words
        to her. Little by little they disappear into the loft in the
        rear_.

MATS. [_To_ KERSTI] Now the worst is over, Kersti.

        [_He goes out_.

BRITA. [_Heading the bridesmaids, to_ KERSTI] You have got the
crown--see that you keep it! [_She and the maids go out_.

KERSTI'S MOTHER. [_Making sure that the crown is on straight_] Keep
your back straight and your head high, girl!

        [_She goes out_.

SOLDIER. [_To_ KERSTI] God bless you! [_Goes out_.

VERGER. [_To_ KERSTI] And protect you! [_Goes out_.

MATS'S GRANDFATHER. [_To_ KERSTI] Comely you are as I am homely! [_Goes
out_.

MATS'S MOTHER. [_To_ KERSTI] Your new family bids you welcome! [_She
goes out_.

MATS'S FATHER. [_To_ KERSTI] _My_ daughter now--the old ties have been
loosed! [_He goes out_.

SHERUT. [_To_ KERSTI] Why so pale? What draws all the blood to your
heart? What is weighing on it?

KERSTI. [_Raising her head at last to give the_ SHERIFF _a furious
look_] Nothing!

SHERIFF. So little is a lot!

KERSTI. Go!

SHERIFF. When you ride, I'll go ahead of you--but we won't be headed
for the same place. When you kneel, I shall be standing, but the cold
steel you'll taste won't be in my hands.

KERSTI. Oh, I wish you'd break your neck!

SHERIFF. [_Putting the palm of his hand on her neck_] Take care of your
own! [_He goes out_.

        _The rest of_ MATS'S _relatives file past her, greeting her
        coldly_.

        _The fiddlers have in the meantime taken their places, and
        several old men have sat down at the table reserved for them
        and begun to smoke. Now the fiddlers strike up an old Swedish
        polka. (See the musical appendix, Melody No_. 17.)

        _At the same time the_ NECK _begins to play the melody heard
        in the first scene, but so powerfully that it sounds like two
        violins. (See musical appendix, Melody No_. 18.)

        _As soon as the dance music is heard, cries of_ "Off with
        the crown!" _are raised, first in the loft, and then in the
        living-room_.

        KERSTI _becomes alarmed_.

        _The_ PASTOR _goes up to her_.

FIDDLERS. [_Crying, as they become aware of the playing of the_ NECK]
Who is cutting in?

ALL. [_Repeat without looking at the water-wheel or knowing from whence
the strange music is heard_] Who is cutting in?

        _Then the_ NECK _ceases playing, while the fiddlers continue.
        The_ PASTOR _takes the bride by the hand and begins to lead her
        around the room in a stately and solemn manner. Just as he puts
        his arm about_ KERSTI'S _waist in order to open the dance with
        her the_ NECK _begins to play again_.

KERSTI. [_Dropping the crown, which rolls into the mill-race_] Jesus
Christ!

        _All the people in the living-room get on their feet and cry_:
        "The crown's in the mill-race!"

        _Those in the rear room shout back_: "What's up?"

        _Those in the living-room repeat_: "The crown's in the
        mill-race!"

        _The fiddlers suddenly stop their playing. The whole place is
        in wild commotion_.

MATS. [_Appearing in the doorway_] We must look for it!

ALL. We must look for it!

PASTOR. God help us and protect us!

ALL. God help us and protect us!

SHERIFF. Let us look for it!

ALL. Let us look for it!

MATS. Yes, let's look!

        _All disappear by the rear door, leaving_ KERSTI _alone on the
        stage. She seats herself on the same chair as before. In the
        meantime the stage has gradually been darkened._

        _The water-wheel begins to turn_.

NECK. [_Appears in the wheel with his harp, and sings_]

    "Stilled are the waters, dark grows the sky:
    Dark grows the sky.
    Once in the world of the ages I lived,
    Blessed by the sun.
    Gone is the light,
    Conquered by night.
    Deep is my sin,
    Black as the tarn.
    Joy there is none;
    Plenty of woe.
    Torture and Shame must I name my abode:
    O!"

        _When the_ NECK _begins to sing, the trap-door flies open right
        at the feet of_ KERSTI, _and the_ MEWLER _appears as before_.

        _At first_ KERSTI _stares at the apparition with horror. Then
        she seizes it and presses it to her breast_.

        _The_ NECK _stops his song and disappears. Instead the voice of
        a child (the_ MOCKER) _is heard from the opening in the floor_.

MOCKER. Cold is the river; warm is my mother's bosom. Nothing you gave
me in life: in death I take what is mine!

KERSTI. [_Who has been rocking the_ MEWLER _on her arm_, _puts a hand
to her breast as if feeling acute pain_] Oh, help! Save me!

MIDWIFE. [_Trips in fussily_] Here I am! Here I am! Mustn't take on
like that! [_She takes the_ MEWLER _from_ KERSTI _and drops it through
the hole in the floor_] I know how to handle little ones! I help them
into the world and out of it.... And I got to the wedding after all!

        BRITA _has in the meantime appeared where the fiddlers were
        seated before, and she has seen the_ MIDWIFE _hide something
        under the floor_.

MIDWIFE. The Neck was also asked, I understand. Did he come?

KERSTI. What will you take to get out of here?

MIDWIFE. What you have lost!

KERSTI. You mean the crown?

MIDWIFE. Not exactly.... Hush!... I think I heard somebody! Then I'll
hide in the fireplace for a while.... I got here after all, as you see!

        _She steps into the fireplace and closes the iron shutters
        behind her_.

BRITA. [_Enters and goes up to_ KERSTI] Now it's you or me!

KERSTI. You, then!

BRITA. A present is waiting for you.

KERSTI. Let's see!

BRITA. Bracelets--but not from me! [_Silence_] Bracelets of steel!
[_She places herself on the trap-door_] Now my foot is on your head
and on your heart! Now I shall stamp your secret out of the earth, or
the water, or the fire--wherever it may be! [_Silence_] Now I shall
have your hair for my watch-chain, which is not what it seems. Where
is the Midwife? Where is the guest of honour at this virginal wedding?
You stole the crown, and the Neck stole it from you. You have stolen
the mill, but it will be returned. Shechem's Dinah has proved not only
spoiled, but soiled! The little one is asleep, not in the forest, but
in the river! You have put my brother to shame, and our whole family,
and the name that we bear! And now you shall die!

KERSTI. [_Submissively_] I am dead! I have been dying for days.... Are
you satisfied now?

BRITA. No, you shall go on dying for days to come! You shall die for
perjury, falsehood, murder, theft, slander, deceit! You shall die six
times over! And when you really die the seventh time, it will seem so
only! You shall not rest in consecrated ground! You shall have no black
coffin with stars of silver on it! You shall have no spruce strewn and
no bells rung....

KERSTI. I suppose not!

BRITA. Therefore.... [_Heavy steps are heard outside_] Do you hear
those steps? Count them! [_She counts in time with the approaching
steps of the_ SHERIFF] One, two, three, four, five, six....

        _The_ SHERIFF _enters from the rear_. BRITA _goes to him and
        whispers something in his ear_.

SHERIFF. It's here, you say?

BRITA. Not the crown, I guess!

SHERIFF. Something else, then! [_He raises the trap-door and looks
down_] No, it is not the crown! Poor Kersti! Did you put it there?

KERSTI. I did not!

SHERIFF. No?--Tell the truth!

KERSTI. I did not put it there!

BRITA. [_Striking her on the mouth_] The truth!

KERSTI. I did not put it there!

BRITA. [_Putting her hand in the_ SHERIFF'S _pocket and taking out a
pair of handcuffs_] On with the bracelets!

SHERIFF. [_To_ BRITA] Born executioner--that's what _you_ are! [_He
puts his hands to his face and weeps_] God have mercy on us!

PASTOR. [_Entering from the rear_] Has it been found?

SHERIFF. Not that, but....

PASTOR. Say no more! I know.... [_Putting his hands to his face and
weeping_] God have mercy on us!

SOLDIER. [_Entering from the rear_] Have you found the crown?

SHERIFF. Not that, but....

SOLDIER. Enough! I know....

        [_Begins to weep, with his hands to his face_.

KERSTI'S MOTHER. [_Entering from the rear_] Have you found the crown?

SHERIFF. No, no!

MOTHER. Oh!

        _She looks hard at_ KERSTI, _who is holding out her hands to
        meet the handcuffs, which_ BRITA _puts on her_.

MOTHER. [_Screaming_] Oh!

        _Snatching up a pair of shears, she cuts off_ KERSTI'S _hair
        and throws it to_ BRITA, _who catches it and sniffs at it as if
        enjoying its odour. The_ MOTHER _then strips her daughter of
        the veil and other bridal ornaments. At last she throws a shawl
        over her head_.

MATS. [_Entering from the rear, stops in front of_ KERSTI _and looks at
her in surprise_] Who is that?

BRITA. Look well!

MATS. [_Looking more closely at_ KERSTI] She reminds me of somebody!

BRITA. Look well!

MATS. I don't know her.

BRITA. Grant God you never had!

MATS. The eyes are different.... But the mouth--that sweet mouth--and
the little chin.... No, it is not she! [_He turns away from_ KERSTI
_and catches sight of the open trap-door_] What's that? You are
standing here as if it were a grave....

BRITA. It is a grave!

MATS. Of what?

BRITA. Of everything--everything that made your life worth while!

MATS. That means the little one!--Who did it?

BRITA. [_Pointing to_ KERSTI] She, and she, and she!

MATS. It is not true!

        _All who were in the room at the beginning and who left to look
        for the crown, have gradually returned, and are now crowded
        together in the background, no one saying a word or making the
        least noise_.

BRITA. It is true!

MATS. You liar!

SOLDIER. [_To_ BRITA] You liar born of liars!

MATS'S RELATIVES. [_Gathering on the left side of_ KERSTI] You liar
born of thieves and liars! That's you!

KERSTI'S RELATIVES [_Gathering on her right side_] No, that's you!

PASTOR. Peace! Peace! In the name of the Lord!

ALL. Peace.

SHERIFF. No one must be condemned untried!

ALL. Let us hear!

SHERIFF. Who brings the charge?

ALL. Who brings the charge?

BRITA. I, Brita Lisa Larsson.

ALL. Brita Lisa Larsson brings the charge. Against whom?

BRITA. Against Kersti Margaret Hansdaughter.

ALL. Against Kersti Margaret Hansdaughter!--What is the charge?

BRITA. If bride be spoiled, the crown is forfeit!

KERSTI'S RELATIVES. And your evidence?

BRITA. Two witnesses make valid evidence.

MATS'S RELATIVES. Two witnesses make valid evidence!

KERSTI'S RELATIVES. We challenge them!

SHERIFF. No challenging without good cause!

BRITA. "If unmarried woman puts away child that comes to its death, the
life of the mother shall be forfeit!"

MATS'S RELATIVES. Her life is forfeit!

KERSTI'S RELATIVES. [_Drawing closer with menacing gestures_]
"Empty-headed men and meanly tempered never know that they are far from
faultless."[1]--The fault is Mats's!

MATS'S RELATIVES. The fault is not Mats's!

KERSTI'S RELATIVES. The fault is his who did the deed!

MATS'S RELATIVES. [_With raised fists_] What deed? You had better ask
Kersti!

KERSTI'S RELATIVES. Ask her!

SHERIFF. [_To_ KERSTI] Did you kill the child?

KERSTI. I did!

MATS'S RELATIVES. There you hear!

KERSTI'S RELATIVES. God have mercy!

MATS'S RELATIVES. Now you can hear!

        MATS _has been standing at the fireplace lost in thought, with
        his back to the rest. Suddenly he tears off everything that
        indicates his character of bridegroom. After a brief moment of
        hesitation, he leaps like mad on the table in the rear and
        disappears through the opening where the fiddlers were seated
        before_.

PASTOR. [_Who has been weeping silently, with his hands covering his
face, goes to the open trap-door and says_]

    "To the dead
    Give peace, O Lord,
    And console
    The living!"[2]

        _All bend their heads, shade their faces with one hand, and
        pray in silence, as the custom is when the Lord's Prayer is
        read in a Swedish church or at a grave_.

PASTOR. May the Lord bless you and protect you!

ALL. [_With their faces buried in their hands_] Amen!

        _Everybody leaves silently and sadly. When_ KERSTI _alone
        remains, the_ SHERIFF _locks the doors in the rear. Then he
        fastens the shutters covering the opening where the fiddlers
        were seated_.

        _From the fireplace is heard a loud noise as of thunder_.

NECK. [_Appears in the water-wheel with his fiddle and plays and sings
as before_] "I am hoping, I am hoping that thy Redeemer still liveth."

        _This he repeats several times, while_ KERSTI _is kneeling on
        the floor with her handcuffed arms raised toward heaven._

        _The_ CHILD IN WHITE _enters from behind the fireplace with a
        basket full of spruce branches and flowers_.

        _The_ NECK _stops singing and disappears_.

        _The_ CHILD IN WHITE _strews the spruce branches on the floor
        so that a green path is formed to the edge of the trap-door.
        When he has reached this, he drops flowers into the hole, from
        which the bell-like notes of the harmonica are heard_.

        _Unseen by_ KERSTI, _he goes up to her, places his hands on her
        head and stands still with upturned face as if in prayer_.

        _The face of_ KERSTI, _which until then has shown deep despair,
        assumes an expression of quiet happiness_.

_Curtain_.


[1] From the Poetic Edda: "The Song of the High One." See introduction.

[2] From the Poetic Edda: "The Song of the Sun." See introduction.



FIFTH SCENE


        _The porch of a country church appears at the right in the
        foreground. It is brilliantly white, with a roof of black
        shingle_. Near the entrance is a sort of pillory, at the foot
        of which KERSTI _lies in penitential garb, with the hood pulled
        forward to cover her face_.

        _A big lake, surrounded by a typical Dalecarlian landscape,
        forms the background. At the foot of the open place before the
        church is a boat-landing. A point of land projects into the
        lake at the right, and there stands the scaffold, consisting
        of a simple wooden platform with a block on it. Two soldiers,
        fully armed, stand "at ease" by the entrance to the porch, from
        within which an organ prelude is heard when the curtain rises_.

        _Two large "church-boats" (of the kind used on Lake Siljan in
        Dalecarlia) gliding slowly forward from opposite directions,
        arrive at the landing simultaneously. The rowers have raised
        their oars and appear to be disputing about the right of
        landing_.

        MATS'S RELATIVES _are in the boat at the left_; KERSTI'S
        RELATIVES _in the boat at the right_.


MATS'S RELATIVES. Look out, Mewlings!

KERSTI'S RELATIVES. Look out, millers!

MATS'S RELATIVES. [_Raising their oars in menace_] Look out!

KERSTI'S RELATIVES. [_In the same way_] Look out!

MATS'S RELATIVES. Can you match us with eight pairs?

KERSTI'S RELATIVES. With sixteen, if needs be! Come on!

MATS'S RELATIVES. At 'em! At 'em!

        _They begin to fight with the oars_.

PASTOR. [_Standing bareheaded in prow of the boat at the left_] Peace!
Peace in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ!

KERSTI'S RELATIVES. Peace!

MATS'S RELATIVES. War! War on life and death!

PASTOR. Peace!

MATS'S RELATIVES. War!

        _The_ VERGER _comes running from the porch, seizes the
        bell-rope and begins to toll the bell_.

        _At the first stroke, all oars are lowered, the boats are
        brought to the landing and tied up side by side. The_ PASTOR
        _is the first one to leave the boat at the left. He is followed
        by_ MATS, _who carries a small white coffin trimmed with lace.
        Then the relatives and friends of_ MATS _gradually step on
        shore_.

        _The_ SOLDIER _leaves the other boat ahead of all the rest and
        is followed by his wife. Then come the relatives and friends
        of_ KERSTI.

        _The people on both sides adjust their clothing while throwing
        angry glances at their opponents_.

        _At last_ MATS _with the coffin leads the way up to the church,
        followed by the_ PASTOR.

MATS. [_Whose face shows intense despair, stops in front of_ KERSTI]
Here is the little one now. He's so light--as light as the mind of a
bad woman. He's asleep--and soon you will be sleeping, too.

KERSTI. [_Raising her head so that the hood falls back_] O!

Mats. "O," indeed! It's the end, while A is the beginning. Between
those two lie many letters, but the last one of all is O. Cry "O"
again--the last time of all--so that the little one may hear it. He
will tell the Lord and the Saviour, and ask them to forgive you! No?
Well, kiss his white coffin then--kiss it where his small feet are
resting--the small, small feet that never had a chance to tread this
sinful earth! [KERSTI _kisses the coffin_] That's right! Now we'll take
him into the church and play and sing and toll the bells over him--but
no clergyman can read him into his grave--because of you! I will speak
the words myself when we get to the grave. We'll plant him in the sod
like a seed in order that he may sprout and grow into a winged blossom.
Some day, perhaps, he will spread his wings and fly to heaven--lifted
by the wind when the midsummer sun is shining!

PASTOR. [_Taking_ MATS _by the arm and drawing him toward the church_]
That's enough, Mats! Come now!

MATS. I am coming.

        _They disappear into the porch, followed gradually by the rest_.

SOLDIER. [_Stops in front of_ KERSTI, _shakes his head sadly and
tries to find words_] Well.... Well....

        [_He goes into the church_.

KERSTI'S MOTHER. [_Speaking drily, with a vain attempt to show
emotion_] Yes, here we are now!--Was it bad in the Castle?

        KERSTI _shakes her head_.

MOTHER. Is there anything you want? To eat or drink--you can have
it now, you know.... Did they give you any tobacco while you were in the
Castle?

        KERSTI _shakes her head_.

MOTHER. Keep your head high, Kersti, and don't let the mill-folk put us
to shame. Don't weep so much either. Your father is a man of war, you
know, and he can't stand that kind of thing. [_Handing her daughter
a hymn-book_] Take this book--and read where I have put the mark. And
look at the mark--I got it from some one--some one who is thinking of
you in your moment of need. And it is a sure cure against the shakes
Farther than this I won't keep you company, Kersti.... I can't--I
really can't, being as old as I am....

KERSTI. Do what you feel like, mother. I have found my comforter! I
know that my Redeemer still liveth!

MOTHER. It's all right, then, child. That's all I wanted to know....
And you don't want me to go with you?

KERSTI. No, mother, you must spare yourself.... You have had enough
trouble on my account as it is.

MOTHER. Then I'll take your word for it, so that the mill-folk won't
have anything to talk about. I take your word for it, so that I can
tell them: "Kersti didn't want it--it was her own will, and of course
her last will was as good as law to me!" And that's just what it is!

        [_She goes into the church._


BRITA. [_Stops in front of_ KERSTI _and points toward the scaffold_]
A queen you were, and a crown you wore: there's your throne now, with
heaven above and hell beneath!--Now you would be glad enough to be
milking cows! Now you wouldn't mind picking wood, and scouring pots,
and cleaning shoes, and rocking the cradle--now, when you have brought
shame on my family and your own, on our parish and our province, so
that the whole country is talking of it! Fie on you!

        KERSTI _bends lower and lower over the hymn-book._


BRITA. My brother must carry your brat to the grave-_my_ brother! But
I shall keep you company to the block when you get spanked! I shall
be your bridesmaid when you're wedded to the axe! "There's a corpse
that isn't dead, and a babe that wasn't bred, and a bride without a
wedding!"

LIT-MATS. Hush up, Brita! Kersti is nice!

BRITA. Indeed!

LIT-MATS. Yes, she is! But I don't like her to have on that ugly
cloak.... That would be right for you, Brita! Oh, Kersti, why are
you lying here? Are you waiting for Communion? And why did you run
away from the wedding? Who is lying in the white box? Is all this a
fairy-tale? Do you know that I lost my doll--the one you gave me?...
Oh, Kersti dear, why are you so sorry?

        [_He throws his arms about her neck_.

KERSTI. [_Taking him on her lap and kissing his shoes_] Oh, Lit-Mats,
Lit-Mats!

BRITA. [_To the soldiers_] Is that allowed?

        _The soldiers stand at attention, but make no reply_.

BRITA. [_Taking_ LIT-MATS _away from_ KERSTI] Come on now!

KERSTI. [_To_ LIT-MATS] Go with your sister, Lit-Mats! And you had
better keep away from me!

        [_She begins to read in a low voice out of the hymn-book_.

BRITA. [_To_ KERSTI] Shall I tell him?

KERSTI. For God's sake, don't tell the child!

BRITA. For the child's sake, I won't!

KERSTI. Thank you, Brita--for the child's sake!

        BRITA _goes into the church with_ LIT-MATS. _The only ones that
        remain outside are_ KERSTI _and the two soldiers_.

        _The_ HEADSMAN _enters from the right, carrying a black box. He
        keeps in the background and does not look in the direction of_
        KERSTI.

KERSTI. [_Catching sight of him_] Christ Jesus, Saviour of the world,
help me for the sake of Thy passion and death!

MIDWIFE. [_Enters from the left and goes up to the_ HEADSMAN] Listen,
my dear man.... If it comes off, would you mind my getting quite close
to it?... I need a little of that red stuff, you know--for a sick
person--one who has the falling sickness....

        _The_ HEADSMAN _goes out to the left without answering_.

MIDWIFE. Oh, he is of the kind that won't listen. [_Going to_ KERSTI]
Ah, there you are, my dear....

KERSTI. [_With a deprecatory gesture_] Begone!

MIDWIFE. [_Keeping behind the pillory so that she cannot be seen by the
soldiers_] Wait a little! Wait a little! Listen now, my dear! I can do
what others can't! The hour is near, and the black one is waiting!

KERSTI. In the name of Christ Jesus, begone!

MIDWIFE. Listen! I can do what others can't! I can set you free!

KERSTI. I have found my Saviour! His name is Christ Jesus!

MIDWIFE. I can make the judge as soft as wax....

KERSTI. He who shall judge the quick and the dead; He who is the
resurrection and the life: He has sentenced me to death in the flesh,
and to--life everlasting.

MIDWIFE. Look at the soldiers! They have gone to sleep! Take my cloak
and run!

KERSTI. Are the soldiers asleep?

MIDWIFE. Their eyes are closed!--Run, run, run!

        KERSTI _rises and looks at the soldiers, who have closed their
        eyes_.

MIDWIFE. Run, run, run!

KERSTI. [_Lying down again_] No, much better is it to fall into the
hands of the living God!--Depart from me!

        _She raises the hymn-book so that the golden cross on its front
        cover faces the_ MIDWIFE.

MIDWIFE. [_Shrinking back_] Shall we meet a Thursday night at the
crossroads?

KERSTI. On the path to the cross I shall meet with my Redeemer, but not
with you! Depart!

MIDWIFE. [_Drawing away_] There is a boat down at the shore--horse and
carriage are waiting on the other side Mats is there, but the Sheriff
not.... Run, run, run!

KERSTI [_Struggling with herself_] O Lord, lead us not into temptation,
but deliver us from evil!

MIDWIFE. Shash-ash-ash-ash! Horse and carriage!

        KERSTI _seizes the bell-rope and pulls it three times. At the
        third stroke of the bell, the_ MIDWIFE _takes flight_.


MIDWIFE. Ad-zee! Ad-zee! Ad-zee! [_She disappears_.

        _The_ CHILD IN WHITE _comes forward from behind one of the
        pillars of the porch. His dress is that worn by girls at
        Rättvik, Dalecarlia (the one with liberty cap, white waist and
        striped apron, which is probably more familiar to foreigners
        than any other Swedish peasant costume), but all its parts are
        white, including the shoes_.

KERSTI. [_As if blinded by his appearance_] Who are you, child--you who
come when the evil one departs?

        _The_ CHILD IN WHITE _puts a finger across his lips_.

KERSTI. White as snow, and white as linen.... Why are you so white?

CHILD IN WHITE [_In a low voice_] Thy faith has saved thee! Out of
faith has sprung hope! [_He goes toward_ KERSTI.

KERSTI. Please, dear, don't step on the ant!

CHILD IN WHITE. [_Stoops and picks up something on a leaf_] But the
greatest of these be love--love of all living things, great or small!
Now I shall send this ant into the woods to tell the king of all the
ants, so that the little people may come here and gnaw the ropes to
pieces, and you will be set free.

KERSTI. No, no! Don't talk like that!

CHILD IN WHITE. Doubt not--but believe! Believe, Kersti!--Believe!

KERSTI. How can I?

CHILD IN WHITE. Believe!

        _He steps behind the pillar again and disappears_.

        _The stage grows darker_.

NECK. [_Appears with his harp in the middle of the lake and sings
to the same melody as before_] "I am hoping, I am hoping, that thy
Redeemer still liveth!"

KERSTI. He sings of _my_ Redeemer! He brings hope to me, who denied it
to him!

        _The_ NECK _sinks beneath the waters_.

SHERIFF. [_Enters reading a document; he approaches a few steps at a
time, now looking at the ground, and now at the paper in his hand_]
Kersti!

        KERSTI _looks up, only to drop her head at once_.

SHERIFF. [_Slowly and with frequent pauses_] Behold the Sheriff!--You
are only scared by him!--Do you think everybody feels like that?
Suppose that the Sheriff has been summoned to help some one in a moment
of dire need. Do you think he will be welcome then? Of course, he
will!... Did you ever see such a lot of ants, Kersti?

        KERSTI _raises her head again and becomes attentive_.

SHERIFF. Look at them! Files of them, and whole hosts! Look!--Do you
know what that means? It is a good omen! But, of course, you never
expect anything good to come from me. You wouldn't believe it _that_
time either--and that's what led to your exposure! Look at those ants!
Look at them! They are making straight for you, Kersti. Are you not
afraid of them?

KERSTI. I used to be, but I am not.

SHERIFF. Big wood-ants, and I think the ant-king himself is with them.
Do you know what can be done by the King, and by no other authority?
Do you know that? All other authorities can pass judgment--all of them
can do that--harshly or mercifully; but there is only one that can
grant pardon. That's the King!--Shall we ask the antking if he will
grant pardon? [_He puts his hand to his ear as if to hear better_]
Would your Majesty be willing to pardon her--that is, in regard to the
worst part?... Did you hear what he answered? I thought he said yes.
But I may have been mistaken.... And being the Sheriff, I can't go by
hearsays, but must have everything in writing. Let us ask the ant-king
to write it down. He has plenty of pens--sharp as needles--and he has
ink of his own, that burns. If we could only find a piece of paper!
[_He pretends to search his pockets, and finally he brings out the
paper he was reading when he entered_] Oh, here we are! Look at this!
The King has written it with his own hand. Do you see? C-A-R-L, which
makes Carl. [_He raises his cap for a moment in salute_] You haven't
seen such big letters since you went to school, Kersti. And look at the
red seal--that smelled like resin in the woods when the sealing-wax
still was warm. And look at the silken cords, yellow and blue--and all
these lions and crowns.... That's royal, every bit of it!... Read it
yourself, Kersti, while I give my orders to the soldiers.

        KERSTI _takes the paper from his hand and reads_.

        _The_ SHERIFF _turns to the soldiers and says something that
        cannot be heard by the public_.

        _The soldiers leave_.

        _When_ KERSTI _has finished reading she hands the document back
        to the_ SHERIFF _in a quiet, dignified manner_.

SHERIFF. Are you glad, Kersti?

KERSTI. I am thankful that my family and yours will be spared the
greatest shame of all. I cannot be glad, for eternal life is better
than a life in fetters.

SHERIFF. Regard it as a time of preparation.

KERSTI. I will!

SHERIFF. Are you still afraid of me?

KERSTI. Having looked death in the face, I fear nothing else.

SHERIFF. Come with me, then.

KERSTI. You must set me free first.

        _The_ SHERIFF _unties the ropes with which she has been bound_.

        _An organ prelude is heard from the church_.

        KERSTI _stretches her arms toward heaven_.

_Curtain_.


SIXTH SCENE


        _The stage represents the frozen surface of a big lake, the
        shores of which form the background. Deep snow covers the ice.
        Tall pine branches stuck into the snow serve to mark the tracks
        used in crossing the lake_.

        _In the centre of the stage, toward the background, a large
        rectangular opening has been cut in the ice. A number of small
        spruce-trees have been set along the edges of it to warn
        against danger_.

        _Long-tailed ducks_ (Heralda glacialis _or_ Clangula glacialis)
        _are floating on the open water. Now and then one of them
        utters its peculiarly melodious cry. (See musical appendix,
        Melody No_. 19.)

        _A number of short fishing-rods are placed along the edges of
        the open water, with their lines out_.

        _A gloomy old structure with turrets and battlements appears on
        the shore in the background. It is known as the "Castle", but
        is in reality a penitentiary_.

        _It is about daybreak_.

        _The_ FISHERMAN _enters from the right dressed in a sheepskin
        coat and hauling a sledge on which lies an ice-hook. All the
        ducks dive when he comes in sight. He begins to examine his
        fishlines_.

MIDWIFE. [_Entering from the left_] How dare you fish on Easter Sunday?

FISHERMAN. I am not fishing--I'm just looking.

MIDWIFE. Perhaps you, who are so clever, can also tell a poor, strayed
old woman where she is?

FISHERMAN. If you give me a light.

MIDWIFE. If you have flint and steel.

FISHERMAN. [_Handing her two pieces of ice_] Here they are.

MIDWIFE. Ice? Well, water is fire, and fire is water!

        _She tears off a piece of her cloak to serve as tinder; then,
        she strikes the two pieces of ice against each other; hiving
        set the tinder on fire in that way, she hands it to the_
        FISHERMAN, _who lights his pipe with it_.

FISHERMAN. Oh, you are that kind? Then I know where I am.

MIDWIFE. But where am I?

FISHERMAN. In the middle of Krummedikke's lake, and over there you see
his castle. He was a king who lived long, long ago, and, like Herod, he
caused all male babes to be slain because he was afraid for his crown.
But now his castle holds all the girls who have not been afraid for
theirs.

MIDWIFE. What are they doing in there?

FISHERMAN. Spinning flax.

MIDWIFE. That's the jail, then?

FISHERMAN. That's what it is.

MIDWIFE. And the lake?

FISHERMAN. Oh, it's a good one! There used to be dry land where the
lake is now, and on that piece of land stood a church, and that church
started a feud. It was a question of pews, you see. The mill-folk, who
thought themselves above the rest, wanted to sit next to the altar, but
the Mewlings were the stronger. One Easter Sunday it broke loose, right
in the nave, and blood was shed. The church was profaned so that it
could never be cleansed again. Instead it was closed up and deserted,
and by and by it sank into the earth, and now there are fifty feet of
water above the weathercock on the spire. By this time the lake has
been washing it and washing it these many hundred years, but as long
as mill-folk and Mewlings keep on fighting, the temple will never be
cleansed.

MIDWIFE. Why are they called Mewlings?

FISHERMAN. Because they are descended from Krummedikke, who slew the
infants.

MIDWIFE. And they are still fighting?

FISHERMAN. Still fighting, and still slaying.... You remember, don't
you, Kersti, the soldier's daughter?

MIDWIFE. Of course, I do.

FISHERMAN. She is in the Castle, but to-day she will be out to do her
yearly public penance at the church.

MIDWIFE. Is that so?

FISHERMAN. The Mewlings are coming to bring her over, and the mill-folk
are coming to look on.

MIDWIFE. Do you hear the ice tuning up?

FISHERMAN. I do.

MIDWIFE. Does it mean thaw?

FISHERMAN. Maybe.

MIDWIFE. Then the ice will begin to break from the shore?

FISHERMAN. Quite likely. But if the water should rise, the rapids down
there will carry it off.

MIDWIFE. Are the rapids far from here?

FISHERMAN. Naw! You can hear the Neck quite plainly. To-day he will be
up betimes, as he is expecting something.

MIDWIFE. What can he be expecting?

FISHERMAN. Oh, you know!

MIDWIFE. No, I don't. Please tell me.

FISHERMAN. This is what they tell: Every Easter Sunday morning, at
the hour when the Saviour ascended from his grave, the church of
Krummedikke rises out of the lake. And he who gets a look at it has
peace in his soul for the rest of the year.

MIDWIFE. [_Gallops out toward the right_] Ad-zee! Ad-zee! Ad-zee!

FISHERMAN. That was a bad meeting.... [_He lands a fish and takes it
from the hook_] I got you!

        _The fish slips out of his hand and leaps into the water. The_
        FISHERMAN _tries to catch it with his dip-net. Then a whole row
        of fish-heads appear above the water_.

FISHERMAN. Dumb, but not deaf! "What roars more loudly than a crane?
What is whiter by far than a swan?"[1]

CHILD IN WHITE. [_Dressed as in the preceding scene, enters on skis,
carrying a torch_;] The thunder of heaven roars more loudly than the
crane, and he who does no evil is whiter than the swan.

        _The fish-heads disappear_.

FISHERMAN. Who read my riddle?

CHILD IN WHITE. Who can free the prisoner from his bonds and set the
tongue of the fish talking?

FISHERMAN. No one!

CHILD IN WHITE. No man by man begotten, but one born of the
all-creative God.... He who has built the bridge of glass can break it,
too!... Beware!

        [_He goes out to the right_.

        _The_ FISHERMAN _begins to gather up his implements_.

        _The_ MILL-FOLK (MATS'S _relatives) enter from the left; all
        are on skis and carry long staffs_. MATS _carries a torch_.

MATS. Where is the winter road?

FISHERMAN. Do you mean the road of the fish in the water?

MATS. No, the road of the horse on the snow.

FISHERMAN. Does it lead to court or church?

MILL-FOLK. To church.

FISHERMAN. For the man who has lost his way, all roads lead to the
rapids. [_A rumbling noise is made by the ice_] The roof is cracking!

MILL-FOLK. Where is the road to the church?

FISHERMAN. Everywhere!

MILL-FOLK. Where is the church?

FISHERMAN. You are standing on it, and walking over it, and soon it
will be here.

MILL-FOLK. Is this Krummedikke's lake?

FISHERMAN. It's Krummedikke's castle and Krummedikke's lake; it's
Krummedikke's church, and soon it will break.

MILL-FOLK. Lord have mercy! [_They go out to the right_.

        _The_ MEWLINGS (KERSTI'S _relatives) enter from the left_, on
        _skis and carrying staffs. The_ SOLDIER _carries a torch_.

MEWLINGS. Is this the road to the church?

FISHERMAN. This is the road to the rapids! Turn back!

MEWLINGS. Ridges and open water everywhere! The floe is breaking loose!

FISHERMAN. Go eastward! The sun is tarrying.

MEWLINGS. Let's go eastward! [_They go out to the right_.

        _The_ MILL-FOLK _return from the right_.

FISHERMAN. Turn back! The floe has broken loose down that way!

MILL-FOLK. And eastward, too! Let's turn northward!

FISHERMAN. There's the river!

MILL-FOLK. Southward, then!

FISHERMAN. There are the rapids!

MILL-FOLK. [_Leaning dejectedly on their staffs_] God have mercy on us!

MATS. The Mewlings put us on the wrong track.

BRITA. As they have always done!

FATHER. And they'll be first at church!

GRANDFATHER. Never mind! But I can't help regretting the day when I
burned the papers.

MOTHER. Will there ever be peace?

GRANDMOTHER. "Men who are mild and gentle live in peace and know but
little sorrow."[2]

MILL-FOLK. [_Raising their staffs_] The Mewlings!

MEWLINGS. [_Entering from the right, with raised staffs]_ Will you bide
now, mill-folk? You put us on the wrong track!

MILL-FOLK. You liars!

MEWLINGS. The same to you!

MILL-FOLK. Quibblers!

MEWLINGS. And what are you?

        _The ice begins to crash and rumble_.

FISHERMAN. Peace in the name of Christ Jesus! The water is rising!

ALL. [_Crying aloud_] The water is rising!

MATS'S GRANDFATHER. The ice is sinking. Stay where you are!

MATS'S GRANDMOTHER. To-day we must die, and then comes the day of
judgment!

        _The_ MILL-FOLK _embrace each other. The women pick up the
        children into their arms. The_ MEWLINGS _do likewise_.

MATS'S MOTHER. [_To_ Mats] For the sake of your foolish fondness, we
must die!

KERSTI'S MOTHER. "Another's love should by no one be blamed: wise men
are often snared by beauty, but fools never."[2]

SOLDIER. "This fault of his should by no one be blamed: love, in its
might, will often turn the sons of men from wisdom to folly."[3]

MATS. [_Holding out his hand to the_ SOLDIER] Thank you for those
words! You are the man I named father for a brief while!

SOLDIER. "All at birth and death are equals."

MATS'S FATHER. There you took the word away from me! Your hand!

SOLDIER. [_Giving his hand after a little hesitation_] Here it is! We
are all Christians, and this is the great day of atonement. Let not the
sun rise on our wrath!

MEWLINGS. Let us have peace!

MILL-FOLK. Yes, let us have peace!

        _The two parties are approaching each other with hands
        stretched out, when a terrific crash is heard, and the ice
        opens at their feet, separating them from each other_.

MATS'S GRANDFATHER. Parted in life and parted in death!

MATS'S GRANDMOTHER. The bridge has broken under the burden of crime.

MATS'S MOTHER. Where is Kersti?

MILL-FOLK. Where is Kersti?

MEWLINGS. Where is Kersti?

SOLDIER. "And lo, it was expedient that one should die for the people."

MATS'S GRANDFATHER. "Then said they unto him: What shall we do unto
thee, that the sea may be calm unto us?"

KERSTI'S MOTHER. "Take me up, and cast me forth into the sea: for I
know that for my sake this great tempest is upon you."

MATS'S GRANDMOTHER. Is it settled?

ALL. It is settled!

KERSTI'S MOTHER. "Behold the fire and the wood: but where is the lamb
for a burnt offering?"

MEWLINGS. Where is Kersti?

MILL-FOLK. Where is Kersti?

        _The_ PASTOR _enters, followed by the_ VERGER.

PASTOR. [_To the_ Soldier] "And the Lord said: Lay not thine hand upon
the child, for now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not
withheld thine only child from me."

ALL. [_To the_ Minister] Save us!

PASTOR. "There is but one God, the Saviour!" Let us pray!

        _All kneel on the ice_.

PASTOR. "Out of the depths I cry unto thee, O Lord!"

ALL. "Lord, hear my voice!"

PASTOR. O Lord, have mercy!

ALL. Christ, have mercy!

        _The_ SHERIFF _enters from the rear with a torch in his hand.
        He is followed by four soldiers, carrying the dead body of_
        KERSTI _between them_.

        _All get on their feet_.

PASTOR. Whom are you bringing with you?

SHERIFF. We are bringing the crown bride--Kersti!

PASTOR. Is she alive?

SHERIFF. She is dead. The waters took her!

PASTOR. May the Lord take her soul!

SOLDIER. O Lord, have respect unto our offering, as thou hast given
thyself for us an offering.

PASTOR. "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son!"

BRITA. The water is falling!

ALL. The water is falling!

        _The gap in the ice is closed up again_.

        MATS _and_ BRITA _walk over to the_ MEWLINGS, _break branches
        from the spruces set in the snow, and spread these over the
        body of_ KERSTI.

PASTOR. Will there be peace after this?

ALL. Peace and reconciliation!

PASTOR. [_Beside the body of_ KERSTI]

    "To the dead
    Give peace, O Lord,
    And console
    The living!"

        _In the background a church is seen rising out of the lake:
        first the gilded weathercock; then the cross resting on a
        globe; and finally the spire, the roof covered with black
        shingles, and the white walls of the round-arched church_.

NECK. [_Is heard playing and singing in the distance, but now his
melody has been transposed into D minor_] "I am hoping, I am hoping,
that my Redeemer still liveth."

PASTOR. Let us give praise and thanks unto the Lord!

ALL. We thank and praise thee, O Lord!

MATS _and_ BRITA _kneel beside the body of_ KERSTI. _All the rest kneel
around them and sing No_. 6 _from the "Old" _Swedish Hymn-Book_ (which
is a free rendering of Luther's_ "Herr Gott, dich loben wir," _and
practically identical with the Ambrosian_ "Te Deum laudamus").

        ALL. [_Singing_]

"O God, we give thee praise! O Lord, we give thee thanks! Eternal
Father, whom the whole world worships!

Thy praise is sung by angels and all the heavenly powers; By Cherubim
and Seraphim thy praise is sung incessantly: Holy, holy, holy, Lord God
of Sabaoth!"

_Curtain_.


[1] Old Swedish folk-riddle, the expected answers to the questions
being respectively: the thunder and an angel.

[2] From the Poetic Edda: "The Song of the High One." See Introduction.

[3] id. note 2.




THE SPOOK SONATA

(SPÖK-SONATEN)

CHAMBER PLAYS: OPUS III

1907


CHARACTERS

    OLD HUMMEL
    _The_ STUDENT, _named Arkenholtz_
    _The_ MILKMAID, _an apparition_
    _The_ JANITRESS
    _The_ GHOST _of the Consul_
    _The_ DARK LADY, _daughter of the Consul and the_ JANITRESS
    _The_ COLONEL
    _The_ MUMMY, _wife of the_ COLONEL
    _The_ YOUNG LADY, _supposedly the_ COLONEL'S _daughter_,
       _but in reality the daughter of_ OLD HUMMEL
    _The_ DANDY, _called Baron Skansenkorge and engaged to
       the_ DARK LADY
    JOHANSSON, _in the service of_ HUMMEL
    BENGTSSON, _the valet of the_ COLONEL
    _The_ FIANCÉE, _a white-haired old woman, formerly engaged
       to_ HUMMEL
    _The_ COOK
    _A_ SERVANT-GIRL
    BEGGARS


FIRST SCENE


        _The stage shows the first and second stories of a modern
        corner home. At the left, the house continues into the wings;
        at the right, it faces on a street supposed to be running at
        right angle to the footlights_.

        _The apartment on the ground floor ends at the corner in a
        round room, above which is a balcony belonging to the apartment
        on the second floor. A flagstaff is fixed to the balcony_.

        _When the shades are raised in the windows of the Round Room, a
        statue of a young woman in white marble becomes visible inside,
        strongly illumined by sunlight. It is surrounded by palms. The
        windows on the left side of the Round Room contain a number of
        flower-pots, in which grow blue, white, and red hyacinths_.

        _A bedquilt of blue silk and two pillows in white cases are
        hung over the railing of the balcony on the second floor. The
        windows at the left of the balcony are covered with white
        sheets on the inside_.

        _A green bench stands on the sidewalk in front of the house.
        The right corner of the foreground is occupied by a drinking
        fountain; the corner at the left, by an advertising column_.

        _The main entrance to the house is near the left wing. Through
        the open doorway appears the foot of the stairway, with
        steps of white marble and a banister of mahogany with brass
        trimmings. On the sidewalk, flanking the entrance, stand two
        laurel-trees in wooden tubs_.

        _At the left of the entrance, there is a window on the ground
        floor, with a window-mirror outside_.

        _It is a bright Sunday morning_.

        _When the curtain rises, the bells of several churches are
        heard ringing in the distance_.

        _The doors of the entrance are wide open, and on the lowest
        step of the stairway stands the_ DARK LADY. _She does not make
        the slightest movement_.

        _The_ JANITRESS _is sweeping the hallway. Then she polishes the
        brass knobs on the doors. Finally she waters the laurel-trees_.

        _Near the advertising column_, OLD HUMMEL _is reading his
        paper, seated in an invalid's chair on wheels. His hair and
        beard are white, and he wears spectacles_.

        _The_ MILKMAID _enters from the side street, carrying
        milk-bottles in a crate of wire-work. She wears a light dress,
        brown shoes, black stockings, and a white cap_.

        _She takes off her cap and hangs it on the fountain; wipes the
        perspiration from her forehead; drinks out of the cup; washes
        her hands in the basin, and arranges her hair, using the water
        in the basin as a mirror_.

        _A steamship-bell is heard outside. Then the silence is broken
        fitfully by a few bass notes from the organ in the nearest
        church_.

        _When silence reigns again, and the_ MILKMAID _has finished
        her toilet, the_ STUDENT _enters from the left, unshaved and
        showing plainly that he has spent a sleepless night. He goes
        straight to the fountain. A pause ensues_.

STUDENT. Can I have the cup?

        _The_ MILKMAID _draws back with the cup_.

STUDENT. Are you not almost done?

        _The_ MILKMAID _stares at him with horror_.

HUMMEL. [_To himself_] With whom is he talking? I don't see anybody.
Wonder if he's crazy?

        [_He continues to look at them with evident surprise_.

STUDENT. Why do you stare at me? Do I look so terrible--It is true
that I haven't slept at all, and I suppose you think I have been making
a night of it....

        _The_ MILKMAID _remains as before_.

STUDENT. You think I have been drinking, do you? Do I smell of liquor?

        _The_ MILKMAID _remains as before_.

STUDENT. I haven't shaved, of course.... Oh, give me a drink of water,
girl. I have earned it. [_Pause_] Well? Must I then tell you myself
that I have spent the night dressing wounds and nursing the injured?
You see, I was present when that house collapsed last night.... Now you
know all about it.

        _The_ MILKMAID _rinses the cup, fills it with water, and hands
        it to him_.

STUDENT. Thanks!

        _The_ MILKMAID _stands immovable_.

STUDENT. [_Hesitatingly_] Would you do me a favour? [_Pause_] My eyes
are inflamed, as you can see, and my hands have touched wounds and
corpses. To touch my eyes with them would be dangerous.... Will you
take my handkerchief, which is clean, dip it in the fresh water, and
bathe my poor eyes with it?--Will you do that?--Won't you play the good
Samaritan?

        _The_ MILKMAID _hesitates at first, but does finally what he
        has asked_.

STUDENT. Thank you! [_He takes out his purse_.

        _The_ MILKMAID _makes a deprecatory gesture_.

STUDENT. Pardon my absent-mindedness. I am not awake, you see....

        _The_ MILKMAID _disappears_.

Hummel. [_To the_ STUDENT] Excuse a stranger, but I heard you mention
last night's accident.... I was just reading about it in the paper....

STUDENT. Is it already in the papers?

HUMMEL. All about it. Even your portrait. They are sorry, though, that
they have not been able to learn the name of the young student who did
such splendid work....

STUDENT. [_Glancing at the paper_] Oh, is that me? Well!

HUMMEL. Whom were you talking to a while ago?

STUDENT. Didn't you see? [_Pause_.

HUMMEL. Would it be impertinent--to ask--your estimable name?

STUDENT. What does it matter? I don't care for publicity. Blame is
always mixed into any praise you may get. The art of belittling is so
highly developed. And besides, I ask no reward....

HUMMEL. Wealthy, I suppose?

STUDENT. Not at all--on the contrary--poor as a durmouse!

HUMMEL. Look here.... It seems to me as if I recognised your voice.
When I was young, I had a friend who always said "dur" instead of
door. Until now he was the one person I had ever heard using that
pronunciation. You are the only other one.... Could you possibly be a
relative of the late Mr. Arkenholtz, the merchant?

STUDENT. He was my father.

HUMMEL. Wonderful are the ways of life.... I have seen you when you
were a small child, under very trying circumstances....

STUDENT. Yes, I have been told that I was born just after my father had
gone bankrupt.

HUMMEL. So you were.

STUDENT. May I ask your name?

HUMMEL. I am Mr. Hummel.

STUDENT. You are? Then I remember....

HUMMEL. Have you often heard my name mentioned at home?

STUDENT. I have.

HUMMEL. And not in a pleasant way, I suppose?

        _The_ STUDENT _remains silent_.

HUMMEL. That's what I expected.--You were told, I suppose, that I had
ruined your father?--All who are ruined by ill-advised speculations
think themselves ruined by those whom they couldn't fool. [_Pause_]
The fact of it is, however, that your father robbed me of seventeen
thousand crowns, which represented all my savings at that time.

STUDENT. It is queer how the same story can be told in quite different
ways.

HUMMEL. You don't think that I am telling the truth?

STUDENT. How can I tell what to think? My father was not in the habit
of lying.

HUMMEL. No, that's right, a father never lies.... But I am also a
father, and for that reason....

STUDENT. What are you aiming at?

HUMMEL. I saved your father from misery, and he repaid me with the
ruthless hatred that is born out of obligation.... He taught his family
to speak ill of me.

STUDENT. Perhaps you made him ungrateful by poisoning your assistance
with needless humiliation.

HUMMEL. All assistance is humiliating, sir.

STUDENT. And what do you ask of me now?

HUMMEL. Not the money back. But if you will render me a small service
now and then, I shall consider myself well paid. I am a cripple, as you
see. Some people say it is my own fault. Others lay it to my parents.
I prefer to blame life itself, with its snares. To escape one of these
snares is to walk headlong into another. As it is, I cannot climb
stairways or ring door-bells, and for that reason I ask you: will you
help me a little?

STUDENT. What can I do for you?

HUMMEL. Give my chair a push, to begin with, so that I can read the
bills on that column. I wish to see what they are playing to-night.

STUDENT. [_Pushing the chair as directed_] Have you no attendant?

HUMMEL. Yes, but he is doing an errand. He'll be back soon. Are you a
medical student?

STUDENT. No, I am studying philology, but I don't know what profession
to choose....

HUMMEL. Well, well! Are you good at mathematics?

STUDENT. Reasonably so.

HUMMEL. That's good! Would you care to accept a position?

STUDENT. Yes, why not?

HUMMEL. Fine! [_Studying the playbills_] They are playing "The Valkyr"
at the matinee.... Then the Colonel will be there with his daughter,
and as he always has the end seat in the sixth row, I'll put you next
to him.... Will you please go over to that telephone kiosk and order a
ticket for seat eighty-two, in the sixth row?

STUDENT. Must I go to the opera in the middle of the day?

HUMMEL. Yes. Obey me, and you'll prosper. I wish to see you happy,
rich, and honoured. Your début last night in the part of the brave
rescuer will have made you famous by to-morrow, and then your name
will be worth a great deal.

STUDENT. [_On his way out to telephone_] What a ludicrous adventure!

HUMMEL. Are you a sportsman?

STUDENT. Yes, that has been my misfortune.

HUMMEL. Then we'll turn it into good fortune.--Go and telephone now.

        _The_ STUDENT _goes out_. HUMMEL _begins to read his paper
        again. In the meantime the_ DARK LADY _has come out on the
        sidewalk and stands talking to the_ JANITRESS. HUMMEL _is
        taking in their conversation, of which, however, nothing is
        audible to the public_. _After a while the_ STUDENT _returns_.

HUMMEL. Ready?

STUDENT. It's done.

HUMMEL. Have you noticed this house?

STUDENT. Yes, I have been watching it.... I happened to pass by
yesterday, when the sun was making every window-pane glitter.... And
thinking of all the beauty and luxury that must be found within, I
said to my companion: "Wouldn't it be nice to have an apartment on the
fifth floor, a beautiful young wife, two pretty little children, and an
income of twenty thousand crowns?"...

HUMMEL. So you said that? Did you really? Well, well! I am very fond of
this house, too....

STUDENT. Do you speculate in houses?

HUMMEL. Mm-yah! But not in the way you mean.

STUDENT. Do you know the people who live here?

HUMMEL. All of them. A man of my age knows everybody, including
their parents and grandparents, and in some manner he always finds
himself related to every one else. I am just eighty--but nobody knows
_me_--not through and through. I am very much interested in human
destinies.

        _At that moment the shades are raised in the Round Room on the
        ground floor, and the_ COLONEL _becomes visible, dressed in
        civilian clothes. He goes to one of the windows to study the
        thermometer outside. Then he turns back into the room and stops
        in front of the marble statue_.

HUMMEL. There's the Colonel now, who will sit next to you at the opera
this afternoon.

STUDENT. Is _he_--the Colonel? I don't understand this at all, but it's
like a fairy-tale.

HUMMEL. All my life has been like a collection of fairy-tales, my dear
sir. Although the tales read differently, they are all strung on a
common thread, and the dominant theme recurs constantly.

STUDENT. Whom does that statue represent?

HUMMEL. His wife, of course.

STUDENT. Was she very lovely?

HUMMEL. Mm-yah--well....

STUDENT. Speak out.

HUMMEL. Oh, we can't form any judgment about people, my dear boy. And
if I told you that she left him, that he beat her, that she returned to
him, that she married him a second time, and that she is living there
now in the shape of a mummy, worshipping her own statue--then you would
think me crazy.

STUDENT. I don't understand at all.

HUMMEL. I didn't expect you would. Then there is the window with the
hyacinths. That's where his daughter lives? She is out for a ride now,
but she will be home in a few moments.

STUDENT. And who is the dark lady talking to the janitress?

HUMMEL. The answer is rather complicated, but it is connected with the
dead man on the second floor, where you see the white sheets.

STUDENT. Who was he?

HUMMEL. A human being like you or me, but the most conspicuous thing
about him was his vanity.... If you were born on a Sunday, you might
soon see him come down the stairway and go out on the sidewalk to make
sure that the flag of the consulate is half-masted. You see, he was
a consul, and he revelled in coronets and lions and plumed hats and
coloured ribbons.

STUDENT. You spoke of being born on a Sunday.... So was I, I understand.

HUMMEL. No! Really?... Oh, I should have known.... The colour of your
eyes shows it.... Then you can see what other people can't. Have you
noticed anything of that kind?

STUDENT. Of course, I can't tell what other people see or don't see,
but at times.... Oh, such things you don't talk of!

HUMMEL. I was sure of it! And you can talk to me, because I--I
understand--things of that kind....

STUDENT. Yesterday, for instance.... I was drawn to that little side
street where the house fell down afterward.... When I got there, I
stopped in front of the house, which I had never seen before....
Then I noticed a crack in the wall.... I could hear the floor beams
snapping.... I rushed forward and picked up a child that was walking
in front of the house at the time.... In another moment the house came
tumbling down.... I was saved, but in my arms, which I thought held
the child, there was nothing at all....

HUMMEL. Well, I must say!... Much as I have heard.... Please tell me
one thing: what made you act as you did by the fountain a while ago?
Why were you talking to yourself?

STUDENT. Didn't you see the Milkmaid to whom I was talking?

HUMMEL. [_Horrified_] A milkmaid?

STUDENT. Yes, the girl who handed me the cup.

HUMMEL. Oh, that's what it was.... Well, I haven't that kind of sight,
but there are other things....

        _A white-haired old woman is seen at the window beside the
        entrance, looking into the window-mirror_.

HUMMEL. Look at that old woman in the window. Do you see her?--Well,
she was my fiancée once upon a time, sixty years ago.... I was twenty
at that time.... Never mind, she does not recognise me. We see each
other every day, and I hardly notice her--although once we vowed to
love each other eternally.... Eternally!

STUDENT. How senseless you were in those days! We don't talk to our
girls like that.

HUMMEL. Forgive us, young man! We didn't know better.--Can you see
that she was young and pretty once?

STUDENT. It doesn't show.... Oh, yes, she has a beautiful way of
looking at things, although I can't see her eyes clearly.

        _The_ JANITRESS _comes out with a basket on her arm and begins
        to cover the sidewalk with chopped hemlock branches, as is
        usual in Sweden when a funeral is to be held_.

HUMMEL. And the Janitress--hm! That Dark Lady is her daughter and the
dead man's, and that's why her husband was made janitor.... But the
Dark Lady has a lover, who is a dandy with great expectations. He is
now getting a divorce from his present wife, who is giving him an
apartment-house to get rid of him. This elegant lover is the son-in-law
of the dead man, and you can see his bedclothes being aired on the
balcony up there.... That's a bit complicated, I should say!

STUDENT. Yes, it's fearfully complicated.

HUMMEL. It certainly is, inside and outside, no matter how simple it
may look.

STUDENT. But who was the dead man?

Hummel. So you asked me a while ago, and I answered you. If you could
look around the corner, where the servants' entrance is, you would see
a lot of poor people whom he used to help--when he was in the mood....

STUDENT. He was a kindly man, then?

HUMMEL. Yes--at times.

STUDENT. Not always?

HUMMEL. No-o.... People are like that!--Will you please move the chair
a little, so that I get into the sunlight? I am always cold. You see,
the blood congeals when you can't move about.... Death isn't far away
from me, I know, but I have a few things to do before it comes.... Just
take hold of my hand and feel how cold I am.

STUDENT. [_Taking his hand_] I should say so!

        [_He shrinks back_.

HUMMEL. Don't leave me! I am tired now, and lonely, but I haven't
always been like this, you know. I have an endlessly long life back
of--enormously long.... I have made people unhappy, and other people
have made me unhappy, and one thing has to be put against the other,
but before I die, I wish to see you happy.... Our destinies have become
intertwined, thanks to your father--and many other things....

STUDENT. Let go my hand! You are taking all my strength! You are
freezing me! What do you want of me?

HUMMEL. Patience, and you'll see, and understand.... There comes the
Young Lady now....

STUDENT. The Colonel's daughter?

HUMMEL. His daughter--yes! Look at her!--Did you ever see such a
masterpiece?

STUDENT. She resembles the marble statue in there.

HUMMEL. It's her mother.

STUDENT. You are right.... Never did I see such a woman of woman
born!--Happy the man who may lead her to the altar and to his home!

HUMMEL. You see it, then? Her beauty is not discovered by everybody....
Then it is written in the book of life!

        _The_ YOUNG LADY _enters from the left, wearing a close-fitting
        English riding-suit. Without looking at any one, she walks
        slowly to the entrance, where she stops and exchanges a few
        words with the_ JANITRESS. _Then she disappears into the house.
        The_ STUDENT _covers his eyes with his hand_.

HUMMEL. Are you crying?

STUDENT. Can you meet what is hopeless with anything but despair?

HUMMEL. I have the power of opening doors and hearts, if I can only
find an arm to do my will.... Serve me, and you shall also have
power....

STUDENT. Is it to be a bargain? Do you want me to sell my soul?

HUMMEL. Don't sell anything!... You see, all my life I have been used
to _take_. Now I have a craving to give--to give! But no one will
accept.... I am rich, very rich, but have no heirs except a scamp who
is tormenting the life out of me.... Become my son! Inherit me while
I am still alive! Enjoy life, and let me look on--from a distance, at
least!

STUDENT. What am I to do?

HUMMEL. Go and hear "The Valkyr" first of all.

STUDENT. That's settled--but what more?

HUMMEL. This evening you shall be in the Round Room.

STUDENT. How am I to get there?

HUMMEL. Through "The Valkyr."

STUDENT. Why have you picked me to be your instrument? Did you know me
before?

HUMMEL. Of course, I did! I have had my eyes on you for a long
time.... Look at the balcony now, where the Maid is raising the flag
at half-mast in honour of the consul.... And then she turns the
bedclothes.... Do you notice that blue quilt? It was made to cover
two, and now it is only covering one.... [_The_ YOUNG LADY _appears
at her window, having changed dress in the meantime; she waters the
hyacinths_] There is my little girl now. Look at her--look! She is
talking to her flowers, and she herself looks like a blue hyacinth.
She slakes their thirst--with pure water only--and they transform the
water into colour and fragrance.... There comes the Colonel with the
newspaper! He shows her the story about the house that fell down--and
he points at your portrait! She is not indifferent--she reads of your
deeds.... It's clouding up, I think.... I wonder if it's going to
rain? Then I shall be in a nice fix, unless Johansson comes back soon
[_The sun has disappeared, and now the stage is growing darker; the
white-haired old woman closes her window_] Now my fiancée is closing
her window.... She is seventy-nine--and the only mirror she uses is
the window-mirror, because there she sees not herself, but the world
around her--and she sees it from two sides--but it has not occurred to
her that she can be seen by the world, too.... A handsome old lady,
after all....

        _Now the_ GHOST, _wrapped in winding sheets, comes out of the
        entrance_.

STUDENT. Good God, what is that I see?

HUMMEL. What _do_ you see?

STUDENT. Don't _you_ see?... There, at the entrance.... The dead man?

HUMMEL. I see nothing at all, but that was what I expected. Tell me....

STUDENT. He comes out in the street.... [_Pause_] Now he turns his head
to look at the flag.

HUMMEL. What did I tell you? And you may be sure that he will count the
wreaths and study the visiting-cards attached to them.... And I pity
anybody that is missing!

STUDENT. Now he goes around the corner....

HUMMEL. He wants to count the poor at the other entrance.... The poor are
so decorative, you know.... "Followed by the blessings of many".... But
he won't get any blessing from me!--Between us, he was a big rascal!

STUDENT. But charitable....

HUMMEL. A charitable rascal, who always had in mind the splendid
funeral he expected to get.... When he knew that his end was near, he
cheated the state out of fifty thousand crowns.... And now his daughter
goes about with ... another woman's husband, and wonders what is in his
will.... Yes, the rascal can hear every word we say, and he is welcome
to it!--There comes Johansson now.

        JOHANSSON _enters from the left_.

HUMMEL. Report!

        JOHANSSON _can be seen speaking, but not a word of what he says
        is heard_.

HUMMEL. Not at home, you say? Oh, you are no good!--Any telegram?--Not
a thing.... Go on!--Six o'clock to-night?--That's fine!--An extra, you
say?--With his full name?--Arkenholtz, a student, yes.... Born....
Parents.... That's splendid! I think it's beginning to rain.... What
did he say?--Is that so?--He won't?--Well, then he must!--Here comes
the Dandy.... Push me around the corner, Johansson, so I can hear what
the poor people have to say.... [_To the_ STUDENT] And you had better
wait for me here, Arkenholtz.... Do you understand?--[_To_ JOHANSSON]
Hurry up now, hurry up!

        JOHANSSON _pushes the chair into the side street and out of
        sight. The_ STUDENT _remains on the same spot, looking at the_
        YOUNG LADY, _who is using a small rake to loosen up the earth
        in her pots. The_ DANDY _enters and joins the_ DARK LADY, _who
        has been walking back and forth on the sidewalk. He is in
        mourning_.

DANDY. Well, what is there to do about it? We simply have to wait.

DARK LADY. But I can't wait!

DANDY. Is that so? Then you'll have to go to the country.

DARK LADY. I don't want to!

DANDY. Come this way, or they'll hear what we are saying.

        _They go toward the advertising column and continue their talk
        inaudibly_.

JOHANSSON. [_Entering from the right; to the_ STUDENT] My master asks
you not to forget that other thing.

STUDENT. [_Dragging his words_] Look here.... Tell me, please.... Who
_is_ your master?

JOHANSSON. Oh, he's so many things, and he has been everything....

STUDENT. Is he in his right mind?

JOHANSSON. Who can tell?--All his life he has been looking for one born
on Sunday, he says--which does not mean that it must be true....

STUDENT. What is he after? Is he a miser?

JOHANSSON. He wants to rule.... The whole day long he travels about in
his chair like the god of thunder himself He looks at houses, tears
them down, opens up new streets, fills the squares with buildings....
At the same time he breaks into houses, sneaks through open windows,
plays havoc with human destinies, kills his enemies, and refuses to
forgive anything.... Can you imagine that a cripple like him has been a
Don Juan--but one who has always lost the women he loved?

STUDENT. How can you make those things go together?

JOHANSSON. He is so full of guile that he can make the women leave
him when he is tired of them.... Just now he is like a horse thief
practising at a slave-market.... He steals human beings, and in all
sorts of ways.... He has literally stolen me out of the hands of the
law.... Hm.... yes.... I had been guilty of a slip. And no one but he
knew of it. Instead of putting me in jail, he made a slave of me. All I
get for my slavery is the food I eat, which might be better at that....

STUDENT. And what does he wish to do in this house here?

JOHANSSON. No, I don't want to tell! It's too complicated....

STUDENT. I think I'll run away from the whole story....

        _The_ YOUNG LADY _drops a bracelet out of the window so that it
        falls on the sidewalk_.

JOHANSSON. Did you see the Young Lady drop her bracelet out of the
window?

        _Without haste, the_ STUDENT _picks up the bracelet and hands
        it to the_ YOUNG LADY, _who thanks him rather stiffly; then he
        returns to_ JOHANSSON.

JOHANSSON. So you want to run away? That is more easily said than done
when _he_ has got you in his net.... And he fears nothing between
heaven and earth except one thing or one person rather....

STUDENT. Wait--I think I know!

JOHANSSON. How could you?

STUDENT. I can guess! Is it not--a little milkmaid that he fears?

JOHANSSON. He turns his head away whenever he meets a milk wagon....
And at times he talks in his sleep.... He must have been in Hamburg at
one time, I think....

STUDENT. Is this man to be trusted?

JOHANSSON. You may trust him--to do anything!

STUDENT. What is he doing around the corner now?

JOHANSSON. Watching the poor dropping a word here and a word there....
loosening a stone at a time ... until the whole house comes tumbling
down, metaphorically speaking.... You see, I am an educated man, and I
used to be a book dealer.... Are you going now?

STUDENT. I find it hard to be ungrateful.... Once upon a time he saved
my father, and now he asks a small service in return....

JOHANSSON. What is it?

STUDENT. To go and see "The Valkyr"....

JOHANSSON. That's beyond me.... But he is always up to new tricks....
Look at him now, talking to the police-man! He is always thick with the
police. He uses them. He snares them in their own interests. He ties
their hands by arousing their expectations with false promises--while
all the time he is pumping them.... You'll see that he is received in
the Round Room before the day is over!

STUDENT. What does he want there? What has he to do with the Colonel?

JOHANSSON. I think I can guess, but know nothing with certainty. But
you'll see for yourself when you get there!

STUDENT. I'll never get there.

JOHANSSON. That depends on yourself!--Go to "The Valkyr."

STUDENT. Is that the road?

JOHANSSON. Yes, if he has said so--Look at him there--look at him in
his war chariot, drawn in triumph by the Beggars, who get nothing for
their pains but a hint of a great treat to be had at his funeral.

        OLD HUMMEL _appears standing in his invalid's chair, which is
        drawn by one of the_ BEGGARS, _and followed by the rest_.

HUMMEL. Give honour to the noble youth who, at the risk of his
own, saved so many lives in yesterday's accident! Three cheers for
Arkenholtz!

        _The_ BEGGARS _bare their heads, but do not cheer. The_ YOUNG
        LADY _appears at her window, waving her handkerchief. The_
        COLONEL _gazes at the scene from a window in the Round Room.
        The_ FIANCÉE _rises at her window. The_ MAID _appears on the
        balcony and hoists the flag to the top_.

HUMMEL. Applaud, citizens! It is Sunday, of course, but the ass in the
pit and the ear in the field will absolve us. Although I was not born
on a Sunday, I have the gift of prophecy and of healing, and on one
occasion I brought a drowned person back to life.... That happened in
Hamburg on a Sunday morning just like this....

        _The_ MILKMAID _enters, seen only by the_ STUDENT _and_ HUMMEL.
        _She raises her arms with the movement of a drowning person,
        while gazing fixedly at_ HUMMEL.

HUMMEL. [_Sits down; then he crumbles in a heap, stricken with horror_]
Get me out of here, Johansson! Quick!--Arkenholtz, don't forget "The
Valkyr!"

STUDENT. What is the meaning of all this?

JOHANSSON. We'll see! We'll see!

_Curtain_.



SECOND SCENE


        _In the Round Room. An oven of white, glazed bricks occupies
        the centre of the background. The mantelpiece is covered by a
        large mirror. An ornamental clock and candelabra stand on the
        mantelshelf_.

        _At the right of the mantelpiece is a door leading into a
        hallway, back of which may be seen a room papered in green,
        with mahogany furniture. The_ COLONEL _is seated at a
        writing-desk, so that only his back is visible to the public_.

        _The statue stands at the left, surrounded by palms and with
        draperies arranged so that it can be hidden entirely_.

        _A door at the left of the mantelpiece opens on the Hyacinth
        Room, where the_ YOUNG LADY _is seen reading a book_.

        BENGTSSON, _the valet, enters from the hallway, dressed in
        livery. He is followed by_ JOHANSSON _in evening dress with
        white tie_.


BENGTSSON. Now you'll have to do the waiting, Johansson, while I take
the overclothes. Do you know how to do it?

JOHANSSON. Although I am pushing a war chariot in the daytime, as you
know, I wait in private houses at night, and I have always dreamt of
getting into this place.... Queer sort of people, hm?

BENGTSSON. Yes, a little out of the ordinary, one might say.

JOHANSSON. Is it a musicale, or what is it?

BENGTSSON. The usual spook supper, as we call it. They drink tea and
don't say a word, or else the Colonel does all the talking. And then
they munch their biscuits, all at the same time, so that it sounds like
the gnawing of a lot of rats in an attic.

JOHANSSON. Why do you call it a spook supper?

BENGTSSON. Because they look like spooks.... And they have kept this
up for twenty years--always the same people, saying the same things or
keeping silent entirely, lest they be put to shame.

JOHANSSON. Is there not a lady in the house, too?

BENGTSSON. Yes, but she is a little cracked. She sits all the time in a
closet, because her eyes can't bear the light. [_He points at a papered
door_] She is in there now.

JOHANSSON. In there, you say?

BENGTSSON. I told you they were a little out of the ordinary....

JOHANSSON. How does she look?

BENGTSSON. Like a mummy.... Would you care to look at her? [_He opens
the papered door_] There she is now!

JOHANSSON. Mercy!

MUMMY. [_Talking baby talk_] Why does he open the door? Haven't I told
him to keep it closed?

BENGTSSON. [_In the same way_] Ta-ta-ta-ta! Polly must be nice now.
Then she'll get something good. Pretty polly!

MUMMY. [_Imitating a parrot_] Pretty polly! Are you there, Jacob?
Currrrr!

BENGTSSON. She thinks herself a parrot, and maybe she's right [_To the_
MUMMY] Whistle for us, Polly.

        _The_ MUMMY _whistles_.

JOHANSSON. Much I have seen, but never the like of it!

BENGTSSON. Well, you see, a house gets mouldy when it grows old, and
when people are too much together, tormenting each other all the time,
they lose their reason. The lady of this house.... Shut up, Polly!...
That mummy has been living here forty years--with the same husband, the
same furniture, the same relatives, the same friends.... [_He closes
the papered door_] And the happenings this house has witnessed! Well,
it's beyond me.... Look at that statue. That's the selfsame lady in her
youth.

JOHANSSON. Good Lord! Can that be the Mummy?

BENGTSSON. Yes, it's enough to make you weep!--And somehow, carried
away by her own imagination, perhaps, she has developed some of the
traits of the talkative parrot.... She can't stand cripples or sick
people, for instance.... She can't bear the sight of her own daughter,
because she is sick....

JOHANSSON. Is the Young Lady sick?

BENGTSSON. Don't you know that?

JOHANSSON. No.--And the Colonel--who is he?

BENGTSSON. That remains to be seen!

JOHANSSON. [_Looking at the statue_] It's horrible to think that....
How old is she now?

BENGTSSON. Nobody knows. But at thirty-five she is said to have looked
like nineteen, and that's the age she gave to the Colonel.... In this
house.... Do you know what that Japanese screen by the couch is used
for? They call it the Death Screen, and it is placed in front of the
bed when somebody is dying, just as they do in hospitals....

JOHANSSON. This must be an awful house! And the Student was longing for
it as for paradise....

BENGTSSON. What student? Oh, I know! The young chap who is coming here
to-night.... The Colonel and the Young Lady met him at the opera and
took a great fancy to him at once.... Hm!... But now it's my turn to
ask questions. Who's your master? The man in the invalid's chair?...

JOHANSSON. Well, well! Is he coming here, too?

BENGTSSON. He has not been invited.

JOHANSSON. He'll come without invitation--if necessary.

        OLD HUMMEL _appears in the hallway, dressed in frock coat and
        high hat. He uses crutches, but moves without a noise, so that
        he is able to listen to the two servants._

BENGTSSON. He's a sly old guy, isn't he?

JOHANSSON. Yes, he's a good one!

BENGTSSON. He looks like the very devil.

JOHANSSON. He's a regular wizard, I think because he can pass through
locked doors....

HUMMEL. [_Comes forward and pinches the ear of_ JOHANSSON] Look out,
you scoundrel! [_To_ BENGTSSON] Tell the Colonel I am here.

BENGTSSON. We expect company....

HUMMEL. I know, but my visit is as good as expected, too, although not
exactly desired, perhaps....

BENGTSSON. I see! What's the name? Mr. Hummel?

HUMMEL. That's right.

        BENGTSSON _crosses the hallway to the Green Room, the door of
        which he closes behind him_.

HUMMEL. [_To_ JOHANSSON] Vanish!

JOHANSSON _hesitates_.

HUMMEL. Vanish, I say!

        JOHANSSON _disappears through the hallway_.

HUMMEL. [_Looking around and finally stopping in front of the statue,
evidently much surprised_] Amelia!--It is she!--She!

        _He takes another turn about the room, picking up various
        objects to look at them; then he stops in front of the mirror
        to arrange his wig; finally he returns to the statue_.

MUMMY. [_In the closet_] Prrretty Polly!

HUMMEL. [_Startled_] What was that? Is there a parrot in the room? I
don't see it!

MUMMY. Are you there, Jacob?

HUMMEL. The place is haunted!

MUMMY. Jacob!

HUMMEL. Now I am scared!... So that's the kind of secrets they have
been keeping in this house! [_He stops in front of a picture with his
back turned to the closet_] And that's he.... He!

MUMMY. [_Comes out of the closet and pulls the wig of_ HUMMEL] Currrrr!
Is that Currrrr?

HUMMEL. [_Almost lifted off his feet by fright_] Good Lord in
heaven!... Who are you?

MUMMY. [_Speaking in a normal voice_] Is that you, Jacob?

HUMMEL. Yes, my name is Jacob....

MUMMY. [_Deeply moved_] And my name is Amelia!

HUMMEL. Oh, no, no, no!--Merciful heavens!...

MUMMY. How I look! That's right!--And _have_ looked like that!
[_Pointing to the statue_] Life is a pleasant thing, is it not?... I
live mostly in the closet, both in order to see nothing and not to be
seen.... But, Jacob, what do you want here?

HUMMEL. My child our child....

MUMMY. There she sits.

HUMMEL. Where?

MUMMY. There--in the Hyacinth Room.

HUMMEL. [_Looking at the_ YOUNG LADY] Yes, that is she! [_Pause_] And
what does her father say.... I mean the Colonel.... your husband?

MUMMY. Once, when I was angry with him, I told him everything....

HUMMEL. And?...

MUMMY. He didn't believe me. All he said was: "That's what all women
say when they wish to kill their husbands."--It is a dreadful crime,
nevertheless. His whole life has been turned into a lie--his family
tree, too. Sometimes I take a look in the peerage, and then I say to
myself: "Here she is going about with a false birth certificate, just
like any runaway servant-girl, and for such things people are sent to
the reformatory."

HUMMEL. Well, it's quite common. I think I recall a certain
incorrectness in regard to the date of your own birth.

MUMMY. It was my mother who started that.... I was not to blame for
it.... And it was you, after all, who had the greater share in our
guilt....

HUMMEL. No, what wrong we did was provoked by your husband when he took
my fiancée away from me! I was born a man who cannot forgive until he
has punished. To punish has always seemed an imperative duty to me--and
so it seems still!

MUMMY. What are you looking for in this house? What do you want? How
did you get in?--Does it concern my daughter? If you touch her, you
must die!

HUMMEL. I mean well by her!

MUMMY. And you have to spare her father!

HUMMEL. No!

MUMMY. Then you must die ... in this very room ... back of that
screen....

HUMMEL. Perhaps.... but I can't let go when I have got my teeth in a
thing....

MUMMY. You wish to marry her to the Student? Why? He is nothing and has
nothing.

HUMMEL. He will be rich, thanks to me.

MUMMY. Have you been invited for to-night?

HUMMEL. No, but I intend to get an invitation for your spook supper.

MUMMY. Do you know who will be here?

HUMMEL. Not quite.

MUMMY. The Baron--he who lives above us, and whose father-in-law was
buried this afternoon....

HUMMEL. The man who is getting a divorce to marry the daughter of the
Janitress.... The man who used to be--your lover!

MUMMY. Another guest will be your former fiancée, who was seduced by my
husband....

HUMMEL. Very select company!

MUMMY. If the Lord would let us die! Oh, that we might only die!

HUMMEL. But why do you continue to associate?

MUMMY. Crime and guilt and secrets bind us together, don't you know?
Our ties have snapped so that we have slipped apart innumerable times,
but we are always drawn together again....

HUMMEL. I think the Colonel is coming.

MUMMY. I'll go in to Adèle, then.... [_Pause_] Consider what you do,
Jacob! Spare him....

        [_Pause; then she goes out_.

COLONEL. [_Enters, haughty and reserved_] Won't you be seated, please?

        HUMMEL _seats himself with great deliberation; pause_.

COLONEL. [_Staring at his visitor_] You wrote this letter, sir?

HUMMEL. I did.

COLONEL. Your name is Hummel?

HUMMEL. It is. [_Pause_.

COLONEL. As I learn that you have bought up all my unpaid and overdue
notes, I conclude that I am at your mercy. What do you want?

HUMMEL. Payment--in one way or another.

COLONEL. In what way?

HUMMEL. A very simple one. Let us not talk of the money. All you have
to do is to admit me as a guest....

COLONEL. If a little thing like that will satisfy you....

HUMMEL. I thank you.

COLONEL. Anything more?

HUMMEL. Discharge Bengtsson.

COLONEL. Why should I do so? My devoted servant, who has been with me a
lifetime, and who has the medal for long and faithful service.... Why
should I discharge him?

HUMMEL. Those wonderful merits exist only in your imagination. He is
not the man he seems to be.

COLONEL. _Who is_?

HUMMEL. [_Taken back_] True!--But Bengtsson must go!

COLONEL. Do you mean to order my household?

HUMMEL. I do ... as everything visible here belongs to me ...
furniture, draperies, dinner ware, linen and other things!

COLONEL. What other things?

HUMMEL. Everything! All that is to be seen is mine! I own it!

COLONEL. Granted! But for all that, my coat of arms and my unspotted
name belong to myself.

HUMMEL. No--not even that much! [_Pause_] You are not a nobleman!

COLONEL. Take care!

HUMMEL. [_Producing a document_] If you'll read this extract from the
armorial, you will see that the family whose name you are using has
been extinct for a century.

COLONEL. [_Reading the document_] I have heard rumours to that effect,
but the name was my father's before it was mine.... [_Reading again_]
That's right! Yes, you are right--I am not a nobleman! Not even
that!--Then I may as well take off my signet-ring.... Oh, I remember
now.... It belongs to you.... If you please!

HUMMEL. [_Accepting the ring and putting it into his pocket_] We had
better continue. You are no colonel, either.

COLONEL. Am I not?

HUMMEL. No, you have simply held the title of colonel in the American
volunteer service by special appointment. After the war in Cuba and the
reorganisation of the army, all titles of that kind were abolished....

COLONEL. Is that true?

HUMMEL. [_With a gesture toward his pocket_] Do you wish to see for
yourself?

COLONEL. No, it won't be necessary.--Who are you, anyhow, and with what
right are you stripping me naked in this fashion?

HUMMEL. You'll see by and by. As to stripping you naked--do you know
who you are in reality?

COLONEL. How dare you?

HUMMEL. Take off that wig, and have a look at yourself in the mirror.
Take out that set of false teeth and shave off your moustache, too. Let
Bengtsson remove the iron stays--and perhaps a certain X Y Z, a lackey,
may begin to recognise himself--the man who used to visit the maid's
chamber in a certain house for a bite of something good....

        _The_ COLONEL _makes a movement toward a table on which stands
        a bell, but is checked by_ HUMMEL.

HUMMEL. Don't touch that bell, and don't call Bengtsson! If you do,
I'll have him arrested.... Now the guests are beginning to arrive....
Keep your composure, and let us continue to play our old parts for a
while.

COLONEL. Who are you? Your eyes and your voice remind me of somebody....

HUMMEL. Don't try to find out! Keep silent and obey!

STUDENT. [_Enters and bows to the_ COLONEL] Colonel!

COLONEL. I bid you welcome to my house, young man. Your splendid
behaviour in connection with that great disaster has brought your name
to everybody's lips, and I count it an honour to receive you here....

STUDENT. Being a man of humble birth, Colonel and considering your name
and position....

COLONEL. May I introduce?--Mr. Arkenholtz--Mr. Hummel. The ladies are
in there, Mr. Arkenholtz--if you please--I have a few more things to
talk over with Mr. Hummel....

        _Guided by the_ COLONEL, _the_ STUDENT _goes into the Hyacinth
        Room, where he remains visible, standing beside the_ YOUNG LADY
        _and talking very timidly to her_.

COLONEL. A splendid young chap--very musical--sings, and writes
poetry.... If he were only a nobleman--if he belonged to our class, I
don't think I should object....

HUMMEL. To what?

COLONEL. Oh, my daughter....

HUMMEL. _Your_ daughter, you say?--But apropos of that, why is she
always sitting in that room?

COLONEL. She has to spend all her time in the Hyacinth Room when she is
not out. That is a peculiarity of hers.... Here comes Miss Betty von
Holstein-Kron--a charming woman--a Secular Canoness, with just enough
money of her own to suit her birth and position....

Hummel. [_To__himself_] My fiancée!

        _The_ FIANCÉE _enters. She is white-haired, and her looks
        indicate a slightly unbalanced mind_.

COLONEL. Miss von Holstein-Kron--Mr. Hummel.

        _The_ FIANCÉE _curtseys in old-fashioned manner and takes a
        seat. The_ DANDY _enters and seats himself; he is in mourning
        and has a very mysterious look._

COLONEL. Baron Skansenkorge....

HUMMEL. [_Aside, without rising_] That's the jewelry thief, I think....
[_To the_ COLONEL] If you bring in the Mummy, our gathering will be
complete.

COLONEL. [_Going to the door of the Hyacinth Room_] Polly!

MUMMY. [_Enters_] Currrrr!

COLONEL. How about the young people?

HUMMEL. No, not the young people! They must be spared.

        _The company is seated in a circle, no one saying a word for a
        while_.

COLONEL. Shall we order the tea now?

HUMMEL. What's the use? No one cares for tea, and I can't see the need
of pretending. [_Pause_.

COLONEL. Shall we make conversation?

HUMMEL. [_Speaking slowly and with frequent pauses._] Talk of the
weather, which we know all about? Ask one another's state of health,
which we know just as well? I prefer silence. Then thoughts become
audible, and we can see the past. Silence can hide nothing--but words
can. I read the other day that the differentiation of languages had its
origin in the desire among savage peoples to keep their tribal secrets
hidden from outsiders. This means that every language is a code, and
he who finds the universal key can understand every language in the
world--which does not prevent the secret from becoming revealed without
any key at times, and especially when the fact of paternity is to be
proved--but, of course, legal proof is a different matter. Two false
witnesses suffice to prove, anything on which they agree, but you don't
bring any witnesses along on the kind of expedition I have in mind.
Nature herself has planted in man a sense of modesty, which tends to
hide that which should be hidden. But we slip into situations unawares,
and now and then a favourable chance will reveal the most cherished
secret, stripping the impostor of his mask, and exposing the villain....

        _Long pause during which everybody is subject to silent
        scrutiny by all the rest_.

HUMMEL. How silent everybody is! [_Long silence_] Here, for instance,
in this respectable house, this attractive home, where beauty and
erudition and wealth have joined hands.... [_Long silence_] All of
us sitting here now--we know who we are, don't we? I don't need to
tell.... And all of you know me, although you pretend ignorance.... In
the next room is my daughter--_mine_, as you know perfectly well. She
has lost the desire to live without knowing why.... The fact is that
she has been pining away in this air charged with crime and deceit and
falsehood of every kind.... That is the reason why I have looked for
a friend in whose company she may enjoy the light and heat radiated
by noble deeds [_Long silence_] Here is my mission in this house: to
tear up the weeds, to expose the crimes, to settle all accounts, so
that those young people may start life with a clean slate in a home
that is my gift to them. [_Long silence_] Now I grant you safe retreat.
Everybody may leave in his due turn. Whoever stays will be arrested.
[_Long silence_] Do you hear that clock ticking like the deathwatch
hidden in a wall? Can you hear what it says?--"It's time! It's
time!"--When it strikes in a few seconds, your time will be up, and
then you can go, but not before. You may notice, too, that the clock
shakes its fist at you before it strikes. Listen! There it is! "Better
beware," it says.... And I can strike, too [_He raps the top of a table
with one of his crutches_] Do you hear?

        _For a while everybody remains silent_.

MUMMY. [_Goes up to the dock and stops it; then she speaks in a normal
and dignified tone_] But I can stop time in its course. I can wipe
out the past and undo what is done. Bribes won't do that, nor will
threats--but suffering and repentance will [_She goes to_ HUMMEL] We
are miserable human creatures, and we know it. We have erred and we
have sinned--we, like everybody else. We are not what we seem, but
at bottom we are better than ourselves because we disapprove of our
own misdeeds. And when you, Jacob Hummel, with your assumed name,
propose to sit in judgment on us, you merely prove yourself worse than
all the rest. You are not the one you seem to be--no more than we!
You are a thief of human souls! You stole mine once upon a time by
means of false promises. You killed the Consul, whom they buried this
afternoon--strangling him with debts. You are now trying to steal the
soul of the Student with the help of an imaginary claim against his
father, who never owed you a farthing....

        _Having vainly tried to rise and say something_, HUMMEL _sinks
        back into his chair; as the_ MUMMY _continues her speech he
        seems to shrink and lose volume more and more_.

MUMMY. There is one dark spot in your life concerning which I am not
certain, although I have my suspicions.... I believe Bengtsson can
throw light on it.

        [_She rings the table-bell_.

HUMMEL. No! Not Bengtsson! Not him!

MUMMY. So he _does_ know? [_She rings again_.

        _The_ MILKMAID _appears in the hallway, but is only seen by_
        HUMMEL, _who shrinks back in horror. Then_ BENGTSSON _enters,
        and the_ MILKMAID _disappears_.

MUMMY. Do you know this man, Bengtsson?

BENGTSSON. Oh yes, I know him, and he knows me. Life has its ups and
downs, as you know. I have been in his service, and he has been in
mine. For two years he came regularly to our kitchen to be fed by our
cook. Because he had to be at work at a certain hour, she made the
dinner far ahead of time, and we had to be satisfied with the warmed-up
leavings of that beast. He drank the soup-stock, so that we got nothing
but water. Like a vampire, the sucked the house of all nourishment,
until we became reduced to mere skeletons--and he nearly got us into
jail when we dared to call the cook a thief. Later I met that man in
Hamburg, where he had another name. Then he was a money-lender, a
regular leech. While there, he was accused of having lured a young girl
out on the ice in order to drown her, because she had seen him commit a
crime, and he was afraid of being exposed....

MUMMY. [_Making a pass with her hand over the face of_ HUMMEL _as if
removing a mask_] That's you! And now, give up the notes and the will!

        JOHANSSON _appears in the hallway and watches the scene with
        great interest, knowing that his slavery will now come to an
        end_.

        HUMMEL _produces a bundle of papers and throws them on the
        table_.

MUMMY. [_Stroking the back of_ HUMMEL] Polly! Are you there, Jacob?

HUMMEL. [_Talking like a parrot_] Here is Jacob!--Pretty Polly! Currrr!

MUMMY. May the clock strike?

HUMMEL. [_With a clucking noise like that of a clock preparing to
strike_] The dock may strike! [_Imitating a cuckoo-clock]_ Cuckoo,
cuckoo, cuckoo....

MUMMY. [_Opening the closet door_] Now the clock has struck! Rise and
enter the closet where I have spent twenty years bewailing our evil
deed. There you will find a rope that may represent the one with which
you strangled the Consul as well as the one with which you meant to
strangle your benefactor.... Go!

        HUMMEL _enters the closet_.

MUMMY. [_Closes the door after him_] Put up the screen, Bengtsson....
The Death Screen!

        BENGTSSON _places the screen in front of the door._

MUMMY. It is finished! God have mercy on his soul!

ALL. Amen!

        _Long silence. Then the_ YOUNG LADY _appears in the Hyacinth
        Room with the_ STUDENT. _She seats herself at a harp and begins
        a prelude, which changes into an accompaniment to the following
        recitative_:

STUDENT. [_Singing_]

    "Seeing the sun, it seemed to my fancy
    That I beheld the Spirit that's hidden.
    Man must for ever reap what he planted:
    Happy is he who has done no evil.
    Wrong that was wrought in moments of anger
    Never by added wrong can be righted.
    Kindness shown to the man whose sorrow
    Sprang from your deed, will serve you better.
    Fear and guilt have their home together:
    Happy indeed is the guiltless man!"


_Curtain_.


THIRD SCENE


        _A room furnished in rather bizarre fashion. The general effect
        of it is Oriental. Hyacinths of different colours are scattered
        everywhere. On the mantelshelf of the fireplace is seen a huge,
        seated Buddha, in whose lap rests a bulb. From that bulb rises
        the stalk of a shallot_ (Allium Ascalonicum), _spreading aloft
        its almost globular cluster of white, starlike flowers_.

        _An open door in the rear wall, toward the right-hand side,
        leads to the Round Room, where the_ COLONEL _and the_ MUMMY
        _are seated. They don't stir and don't utter a word. A part of
        the Death Screen is also visible_.

        _Another door, at the left, leads to the pantry and the
        kitchen. The_ YOUNG LADY _[Adèle] and the_ STUDENT _are
        discovered near a table. She is seated at her harp, and he
        stands beside her_.


YOUNG LADY. Sing to my flowers.

STUDENT. Is this the flower of your soul?

YOUNG LADY. The one and only.--Are you fond of the hyacinth?

STUDENT. I love it above all other flowers. I love its virginal shape
rising straight and slender out of the bulb that rests on the water and
sends its pure white rootlets down into the colourless fluid. I love
the colour of it, whether innocently white as snow or sweetly yellow
as honey; whether youthfully pink or maturely red; but above all if
blue--with the deep-eyed, faith-inspiring blue of the morning sky. I
love these flowers, one and all; love them more than pearls or gold,
and have loved them ever since I was a child. I have always admired
them, too, because they possess every handsome quality that I lack....
And yet....

YOUNG LADY. What?

STUDENT. My love is unrequited. These beautiful blossoms hate me.

YOUNG LADY. How do you mean?

STUDENT. Their fragrance, powerful and pure as the winds of early
spring, which have passed over melting snow--it seems to confuse my
senses, to make me deaf and blind, to crowd me out of the room, to
bombard me with poisoned arrows that hurt my heart and set my head on
fire. Do you know the legend of that flower?

YOUNG LADY. Tell me about it.

STUDENT. Let us first interpret its symbolism. The bulb is the earth,
resting on the water or buried in the soil. From that the stalk rises,
straight as the axis of the universe. At its upper end appear the
six-pointed, starlike flowers.

YOUNG LADY. Above the earth--the stars! What lofty thought! Where did
you find it? How did you discover it?

STUDENT. Let me think.... In your eyes!--It is, therefore, an image of
the Cosmos. And that is the reason why Buddha is holding the earth-bulb
in his lap, brooding on it with a steady gaze, in order that he may
behold it spread outward and upward as it becomes transformed into a
heaven.... This poor earth must turn into a heaven! That is what Buddha
is waiting for!

YOUNG LADY. I see now.... Are not the snow crystals six-pointed, too,
like the hyacinth-lily?

STUDENT. You are right! Thus the snow crystal is a falling star....

YOUNG LADY. And the snowdrop is a star of snow--grown out of the snow.

STUDENT. But the largest and most beautiful of all the stars in the
firmament, the red and yellow Sirius, is the narcissus, with its
yellow-and-red cup and its six white rays....

YOUNG LADY. Have you seen the shallot bloom?

STUDENT. Indeed, I have! It hides its flowers within a ball, a globe
resembling the celestial one, and strewn, like that, with white
stars....

YOUNG LADY. What a tremendous thought! Whose was it?

STUDENT. Yours!

YOUNG LADY. No, yours!

STUDENT. Ours, then! We have jointly given birth to something: we are
wedded....

YOUNG LADY. Not yet.

STUDENT. What more remains?

YOUNG LADY. To await the coming ordeal in patience!

STUDENT. I am ready for it. [_Pause_] Tell me! Why do your parents sit
there so silently, without saying a single word?

YOUNG LADY. Because they have nothing to say to each other, and because
neither one believes what the other says. This is the way my father
puts it: "What is the use of talking, when you can't fool each other
anyhow?"

STUDENT. That's horrible....

YOUNG LADY. Here comes the Cook.... Look! how big and fat she is!

STUDENT. What does she want?

YOUNG LADY. Ask me about the dinner.... You see, I am looking after the
house during my mother's illness.

STUDENT. Have we to bother about the kitchen, too?

YOUNG LADY. We must eat.... Look at that Cook.... I can't bear the
sight of her....

STUDENT. What kind of a monster is she?

Young Lady. She belongs to the Hummel family of vampires. She is eating
us alive.

STUDENT. Why don't you discharge her?

YOUNG LADY. Because she won't leave. We can do nothing with her, and
we have got her for the sake of our sins.... Don't you see that we are
pining and wasting away?

STUDENT. Don't you get enough to eat?

YOUNG LADY. Plenty of dishes, but with all the nourishment gone from
the food. She boils the life out of the beef, and drinks the stock
herself, while we get nothing but fibres and water. In the same way,
when we have roast, she squeezes it dry. Then she eats the gravy and
drinks the juice herself. She takes the strength and savour out of
everything she touches. It is as if her eyes were leeches. When she has
had coffee, we get the grounds. She drinks the wine and puts water into
the bottles....

STUDENT. Kick her out!

YOUNG LADY. We can't!

STUDENT. Why not?

YOUNG LADY. We don't know! But she won't leave! And nobody can do
anything with her. She has taken all our strength away from us.

STUDENT. Will you let me dispose of her?

YOUNG LADY. No! It has to be as it is, I suppose.--Here she is now. She
will ask me what I wish for dinner, and I tell her, and then she will
make objections, and in the end she has her own way.

STUDENT. Why don't you leave it to her entirely?

YOUNG LADY. She won't let me.

STUDENT. What a strange house! It seems to be bewitched!

YOUNG LADY. It is!--Now she turned back on seeing you here.

COOK. [_Appearing suddenly in the doorway at that very moment_] Naw,
that was not the reason.

        [_She grins so that every tooth can be seen_.

STUDENT. Get out of here!

COOK. When it suits me! [_Pause_] Now it does suit me!

        [_She disappears_.

YOUNG LADY. Don't lose your temper! You must practise patience.
She is part of the ordeal we have to face in this house. We have a
chambermaid, too, after whom we have to put everything back where it
belongs.

STUDENT. Now I am sinking! _Cor in aethere!_ Music!

YOUNG LADY. Wait!

STUDENT. Music!

YOUNG LADY. Patience!--This is named the Room of Ordeal.... It is
beautiful to look at, but is full of imperfections.

STUDENT. Incredible! Yet such things have to be borne. It is very
beautiful, although a little cold. Why don't you have a fire?

YOUNG LADY. Because the smoke comes into the room.

STUDENT. Have the chimney swept!

YOUNG LADY. It doesn't help.--Do you see that writing-table?

STUDENT. Remarkably handsome!

YOUNG LADY. But one leg is too short. Every day I put a piece of cork
under that leg. Every day the chambermaid takes it away when she sweeps
the room. Every day I have to cut a new piece. Both my penholder and my
inkstand are covered with ink every morning, and I have to clean them
after that woman--as sure as the sun rises. [_Pause]_ What is the worst
thing you can think of?

STUDENT. To count the wash. Ugh!

YOUNG LADY. That's what I have to do. Ugh!

STUDENT. Anything else?

YOUNG LADY. To be waked out of your sleep and have to get up and dose
the window--which the chambermaid has left unlatched.

STUDENT. Anything else?

YOUNG LADY. To get up on a ladder and tie on the cord which the
chambermaid has torn from the window-shade.

STUDENT. Anything else?

YOUNG LADY. To sweep after her; to dust after her; to start the fire
again, after she has merely thrown some wood into the fireplace! To
watch the damper in the fireplace; to wipe every glass; to set the
table over again; to open the wine-bottles; to see that the rooms are
aired; to make over your bed; to rinse the water-bottle that is green
with sediment; to buy matches and soap, which are always lacking; to
wipe the chimneys and cut the wicks in order to keep the lamps from
smoking and in order to keep them from going out when we have company,
I have to fill them myself....

STUDENT. Music!

YOUNG LADY. Wait! The labour comes first--the labour of keeping the
filth of life at a distance.

STUDENT. But you are wealthy, and you have two servants?

YOUNG LADY. What does that help? What would it help to have three? It
is troublesome to live, and at times I get tired.... Think, then, of
adding a nursery!

STUDENT. The greatest of joys....

YOUNG LADY. And the costliest.... Is life really worth so much trouble?

STUDENT. It depends on the reward you expect for your labours.... To
win your hand I would face anything.

YOUNG LADY. Don't talk like that. You can never get me.

STUDENT. Why?

YOUNG LADY. You mustn't ask.

        [_Pause_.

STUDENT. You dropped your bracelet out of the window....

YOUNG LADY. Yes, because my hand has grown too small....

        [_Pause_.

        _The_ COOK _appears with a bottle of Japanese soy in her hand_.

YOUNG LADY. There is the one that eats me and all the rest alive.

STUDENT. What has she in her hand?

COOK. This is my colouring bottle that has letters on it looking like
scorpions. It's the soy that turns water into bouillon, and that takes
the place of gravy. You can make cabbage soup out of it, or mock-turtle
soup, if you prefer.

STUDENT. Out with you!

COOK. You take the sap out of us, and we out of you. We keep the blood
for ourselves and leave you the water--with the colouring. It's the
colour that counts! Now I shall leave, but I stay just the same--as
long as I please!

        [_She goes out_.

STUDENT. Why has Bengtsson got a medal?

YOUNG LADY. On account of his great merits.

STUDENT. Has he no faults?

YOUNG LADY. Yes, great ones, but faults bring you no medals, you know.

        [_Both smile_.

STUDENT. You have a lot of secrets in this house....

YOUNG LADY. As in all houses.... Permit us to keep ours! [_Pause_.

STUDENT. Do you care for frankness?

YOUNG LADY. Within reason.

STUDENT. At times I am seized with a passionate craving to say all
I think.... Yet I know that the world would go to pieces if perfect
frankness were the rule. [_Pause_ I attended a funeral the other
day--in one of the churches--and it was very solemn and beautiful.

YOUNG LADY. That of Mr. Hummel?

STUDENT. Yes, that of my pretended benefactor. An elderly friend of the
deceased acted as mace-bearer and stood at the head of the coffin. I
was particularly impressed by the dignified manner and moving words of
the minister. I had to cry--everybody cried.... A number of us went to
a restaurant afterward, and there I learned that the man with the mace
had been rather too friendly with the dead man's son....

        _The_ YOUNG LADY _stares at him, trying to make out the meaning
        of his words_.

STUDENT. I learned, too, that the dead man had borrowed money of his
son's devoted friend.... [_Pause_] And the next day the minister was
arrested for embezzling the church funds.--Nice, isn't it?

YOUNG LADY. Oh! [_Pause_.

STUDENT. Do you know what I am thinking of you now?

YOUNG LADY. Don't tell, or I'll die!

STUDENT. I must, lest _I_ die!

YOUNG LADY. It is only in the asylum you say all that you think....

STUDENT. Exactly! My father died in a madhouse....

YOUNG LADY. Was he sick?

STUDENT. No, perfectly well, and yet mad. It broke out at last, and
these were the circumstances. Like all of us, he was surrounded by
a circle of acquaintances whom he called friends for the sake of
convenience, and they were a lot of scoundrels, of course, as most
people are. He had to have some society, however, as he couldn't sit
all alone. As you know, no one tells people what he thinks of them
under ordinary circumstances, and my father didn't do so either.
He knew that they were false, and he knew the full extent of their
perfidy, but, being a wise man and well brought up, he remained
always polite. One day he gave a big party.... It was in the evening,
naturally, and he was tired out by a hard day's work. Then the strain
of keeping his thoughts to himself while talking a lot of damned rot
to his guests.... [_The_ YOUNG LADY _is visibly shocked_] Well, while
they were still at the table, he rapped for silence, raised his glass,
and began to speak.... Then something loosed the trigger, and in a long
speech he stripped the whole company naked, one by one, telling them
all he knew about their treacheries. At last, when utterly tired out,
he sat down on the table itself and told them all to go to hell!

YOUNG LADY. Oh!

STUDENT. I was present, and I shall never forget what happened after
that. My parents had a fight, the guests rushed for the doors--and
my father was taken to a madhouse, where he died! [_Pause_] To keep
silent too long is like letting water stagnate so that it rots. That is
what has happened in this house. There is something rotten here. And
yet I thought it paradise itself when I saw you enter here the first
time.... It was a Sunday morning, and I stood gazing into these rooms.
Here I saw a Colonel who was no colonel. I had a generous benefactor
who was a robber and had to hang himself. I saw a Mummy who was not a
mummy, and a maiden--how about the maidenhood, by the by?... Where is
beauty to be found? In nature, and in my own mind when it has donned
its Sunday clothes. Where do we find honour and faith? In fairy-tales
and childish fancies. Where can I find anything that keeps its promise?
Only in my own imagination!... Your flowers have poisoned me and now
I am squirting their poison back at you.... I asked you to become my
wife in a home full of poetry, and song, and music; and then the
Cook appeared.... _Sursum corda!_ Try once more to strike fire and
purple out of the golden harp.... Try, I ask you, I implore you on my
knees.... [_As she does not move_] Then I must do it myself! [_He picks
up the harp, but is unable to make its strings sound_] It has grown
deaf and dumb! Only think that the most beautiful flower of all can
be so poisonous--that it can be more poisonous than any other one....
There must be a curse on all creation and on life itself.... Why did
you not want to become my bride? Because the very well-spring of life
within you has been sickened.... Now I can feel how that vampire in
the kitchen is sucking my life juices.... She must be a Lamia, one of
those that suck the blood of children. It is always in the servants'
quarters that the seed-leaves of the children are nipped, if it has
not already happened in the bedroom.... There are poisons that blind
you, and others that open your eyes more widely. I must have been born
with that second kind of poison, I fear, for I cannot regard what is
ugly as beautiful, or call evil good--I cannot! They say that Jesus
Christ descended into hell. It refers merely to his wanderings on this
earth--his descent into that madhouse, that jail, that morgue, the
earth. The madmen killed him when he wished to liberate them, but the
robber was set free. It is always the robber who gets sympathy! Woe!
Woe is all of us! Saviour of the World, save us--we are perishing!

        _Toward the end of the_ STUDENT'S _speech, the_ YOUNG LADY
        _has drooped more and more. She seems to be dying. At last she
        manages to reach a bell and rings for_ BENGTSSON, _who enters
        shortly afterward_.

YOUNG LADY. Bring the screen! Quick! I am dying!

        BENGTSSON _fetches the screen, opens it and places it so that
        the_ YOUNG LADY _is completely hidden behind_.

STUDENT. The liberator is approaching! Be welcome, thou pale and gentle
one!--Sleep, you beauteous, unhappy and innocent creature, who have
done nothing to deserve your own sufferings! Sleep without dreaming,
and when you wake again--may you be greeted by a sun that does not
burn, by a home without dust, by friends without stain, by a love
without flaw! Thou wise and gentle Buddha, who sitst waiting there to
see a heaven sprout from this earth, endow us with patience in the hour
of trial, and with purity of will, so that thy hope be not put to shame!

        _The strings of the harp begin to hum softly, and a white light
        pours into the room_.

STUDENT. [_Singing_]

    "Seeing the sun, it seemed to my fancy
    That I beheld the Spirit that's hidden.
    Man must for ever reap what he planted:
    Happy is he who has done no evil.
    Wrong that was wrought in moments of anger
    Never by added wrong can be righted.
    Kindness shown to the man whose sorrow
    Sprang from your deed, will serve you better.
    Fear and guilt have their home together:
    Happy indeed is the guiltless man!"[1]

        _A faint moaning sound is heard from behind the screen_.

STUDENT. You poor little child--you child of a world of illusion,
guilt, suffering, and death--a world of eternal change,
disappointment, and pain--may the Lord of Heaven deal mercifully with
you on your journey!

        _The whole room disappears, and in its place appears Boecklin's
        "The Island of Death" Soft music, very quiet and pleasantly
        wistful, is heard from without_.

_Curtain_.


[1] The lines recited by the _STUDENT_ are a paraphrase of several
passages from "The Song of the Sun" in the Poetic Edda. It is
characteristic of Strindberg's attitude during his final period that
this Eddic poem, which apparently has occupied his mind great deal, as
he has used it a number of times in "The Bridal Crown" also, is the
only one of that ancient collection which is unmistakably Christian
in its colouring. It has a certain apocryphal reputation and is not
regarded on a par with the other contents of the Poetic Edda.




THE FIRST WARNING

(FÖRSTA VARNINGEN)

A COMEDY IN ONE ACT

1893


CHARACTERS

    _The_ HUSBAND, _thirty-seven (Axel Brunner)_
    _The_ WIFE, _thirty-six (Olga Brunner)_
    ROSE, _fifteen_
    _The_ BARONESS, _her mother, forty-seven_
    _A_ MAID


_The scene is laid in Germany, about_ 1890.


        _A German dining-room, with a rectangular dinner-table
        occupying the middle of the floor. A huge wardrobe stands at
        the right. There is an oven of glazed bricks_.

        _The door in the background stands open, disclosing a landscape
        with vineyards, above which appears a church spire_.

        _At the left is a door papered like the rest of the wait. A
        travelling-bag is placed on a chair by the wardrobe_.

        _The_ WIFE _is writing at the table, on which lie a bunch of
        flowers and a pair of gloves_.


HUSBAND. [_Entering_] Good morning--although it's noon already. Did you
sleep well?

WIFE. Splendidly, considering the circumstances.

HUSBAND. Yes, we might have broken away a little earlier from that
party last night....

WIFE. I seem to remember that you made the same remark a number of
times during the night....

HUSBAND. [_Playing with the flowers_] Do you really remember that much?

WIFE. I remember also that you got mad because I sang too much....
Please don't spoil my flowers!

HUSBAND. Which previously belonged to the Captain, I suppose?

WIFE. Yes, and which probably belonged to the gardener before the
florist got them. But now they are mine.

HUSBAND. [_Throwing away the flowers_] It's a nice habit they have in
this place--of sending flowers to other people's wives.

WIFE. I think it would have been well for you to go to bed a little
earlier.

HUSBAND. I am perfectly convinced that the Captain was of the same
opinion. But as my one choice was to stay and be made ridiculous, or go
home alone and be made equally ridiculous, I preferred to stay....

WIFE. ... And make yourself ridiculous.

HUSBAND. Can you explain why you care to be the wife of a ridiculous
man? I should never care to be the husband of a ridiculous woman.

WIFE. You are to be pitied!

HUSBAND. Right you are. Frequently I have thought so myself. But do you
know what is the most tragical feature of my ridiculousness?

WIFE. I am sure your own answer will be much cleverer than any one I
could give.

HUSBAND. It is--that I am in love with my wife after fifteen years of
marriage....

WIFE. Fifteen years! Have you begun to use a pedometer?

HUSBAND. For the measurement of my thorny path, you mean? No. But you,
who are dancing on roses, might do well in counting your steps To me
you are still as young as ever--unfortunately--while my own hair is
turning grey. But as we are of the same age, my looks should tell you
that you must be growing old yourself....

WIFE. And that is what you are waiting for?

HUSBAND. Exactly. How many times have I not wished that you were old
and ugly, that you were pock-marked, that your teeth were gone, just to
have you to myself and be rid of this worry which never leaves me!

WIFE. How charming! And once you had me old and ugly, then everything
would be so very peaceful until you began to worry about somebody
else, and I was left to enjoy all that peace alone, by myself.

HUSBAND. No!

WIFE. Yes! It has been well proved that your love loses its fervour the
moment you have no reason to be jealous. Do you remember last summer,
when there was not a soul on that island but we two? You were away all
day, fishing, hunting, getting up an appetite, putting on flesh--and
developing a self-assurance that was almost insulting.

HUSBAND. And yet I recall being jealous--of the hired man.

WIFE. Merciful Heavens!

HUSBAND. Yes, I noticed that you couldn't give him an order without
making conversation; that you couldn't send him out to cut some wood
without first having inquired about the state of his health, his future
prospects, and his love-affairs.... You are blushing, I think?

WIFE. Because I am ashamed of you....

HUSBAND ... Who....

WIFE. ... Have no sense of shame whatever.

HUSBAND. Yes, so you say. But will you please tell me why you hate me?

WIFE. I don't hate you. I simply despise you! Why? Probably for the
same reason that makes me despise all men as soon as they--what do you
call it?--are in love with me. I am like that, and I can't tell why.

HUSBAND. So I have observed, and my warmest wish has been that I might
hate you, so that you might love me. Woe is the man who loves his own
wife!

WIFE. Yes, you are to be pitied, and so am I, but what can be done?

HUSBAND. Nothing. We have roved and roamed for seven years, hoping that
some circumstance, some chance, might bring about a change. I have
tried to fall in love with others, and have failed. In the meantime
your eternal contempt and my own continued ridiculousness have stripped
me of all courage, all faith in myself, all power to act. Six times I
have run away from you--and now I shall make my seventh attempt. [_He
rises and picks up the travelling-bag_.

WIFE. So those little trips of yours were attempts to run away?

HUSBAND. Futile attempts! The last time I got as far as Genoa. I went
to the galleries, but saw no pictures--only you. I went to the opera,
but heard nobody--only your voice back of every note. I went to a
Pompeian café, and the one woman that pleased me looked like you--or
seemed to do so later.

WIFE. [_Revolted_] You have visited places of that kind?

HUSBAND. Yes, that far have I been carried by my love--and by my
virtue, which has embarrassed me by making me ridiculous.

WIFE. That's the end of everything between us two!

HUSBAND. So I suppose, as I can't make you jealous.

WIFE. No, I don't know what it is to be jealous--not even of Rose, who
loves you to distraction.

HUSBAND. How ungrateful of me not to notice it! On the other hand, I
have had my suspicions of the old Baroness, who is all the time finding
excuses for visiting that big wardrobe over there. But as she is our
landlady, and the furniture belongs to her, I may be mistaken as to
the motive that makes our rooms so attractive to her.... Now I'll get
dressed, and in half an hour I shall be gone--without any farewells, if
you please!

WIFE. You seem rather afraid of farewells.

HUSBAND. Particularly when you are concerned in them!

        _He goes out. The_ WIFE _remains alone a few moments. Then_
        ROSE _enters. She is carelessly dressed, and her hair is down.
        A scarf wrapped about her head and covering her cheeks and chin
        indicates toothache. There is a hole on the left sleeve of her
        dress, which ends half-way between her knees and her ankles_.

WIFE. Well, Rose!--What's the matter, child?

ROSE. Good morning, Mrs. Brunner. I have such a toothache that I wish I
were dead!

WIFE. Poor little thing!

ROSE. To-morrow is the Corpus Christi festival, and I was to walk in
the procession--and to-day I should be binding my wreath of roses, and
Mr. Axel has promised to help me with it.... Oh, those teeth!

WIFE. Let me see if there are any signs of decay--open your mouth
now!--What wonderful teeth you have! Perfect pearls, my dear child!
[_She kisses_ ROSE _on the mouth_.

ROSE. [_Annoyed_] You mustn't kiss me, Mrs. Olga! You mustn't! I don't
want it! [_She climbs up on the table and puts her feet on one of the
chairs_ ] Really, I don't know what I want! I should have liked to
go to that party yesterday--but I was forced to stay at home all by
myself in order to get my lessons done--just as if I were nothing but
a child--and then I have to sit on the same bench with those kids!
But all the same I won't let the Captain chuck me under the chin any
longer, for I am no child! No, I am not! And if my mother tries to pull
my hair again--I don't know what I'll do to her!

WIFE. What's the matter, my dear Rose? What has happened, anyhow?

ROSE. I don't know what is the matter, but I have shooting pains in
my head and in my teeth, and I feel as if I had a red-hot iron in my
back--and I am disgusted with life. I should like to drown myself. I
should like to run away, and go from one fair to another, and sing,
and be insulted by all sorts of impudent fellows....

WIFE. Listen, Rose! Listen to me now!

ROSE. I wish I had a baby! Oh, I wish it were not such an awful
shame to have a baby! Oh, Mrs. Olga [_She catches sight of the
travelling-bag_] Who is going away?

WIFE. My ... my husband.

ROSE. Then you have been nasty to him again, Mrs. Olga.--Where is he
going? Is he going far away? When will he be back?

WIFE. I--_I_ know nothing at all!

ROSE. Oh, you don't? Haven't you asked him even? [_She begins to
ransack the bag_] But I--_I_ can see that he is going far away, because
here is his passport. Very far, I am sure! How far, do you think?--Oh,
Mrs. Olga, why can't you be nice to him, when he is so kind to you?

        [_She throws herself weeping into the arms of Mrs. Brunner_.

WIFE. Now, now, my dear child! Poor little girl--is she crying? Poor,
innocent heart!

ROSE. I like Mr. Axel so much!

WIFE. And you are not ashamed of saying so to his own wife? And you
want me to console you--you, who are my little rival?--Well, have a
good cry, my dear child. That helps a whole lot.

ROSE. [_Tearing herself away_] No! If I don't want to cry, I don't have
to! And if it suits me to pick up what you are throwing away, I'll do
so!--I don't ask any one's permission to like anybody or anything!

WIFE. Well, well, well! But are you so sure that he likes you?

ROSE. [_Throwing herself into the elder woman's arms again, weeping_]
No, I am not.

WIFE. [_Tenderly, as if talking to a baby_] And now perhaps you want
me to ask Mr. Axel to like you? Is that what Mrs. Olga has to do?

ROSE. [_Weeping_] Ye-es!--And he mustn't go away! He mustn't!--Please
be nice to him, Mrs. Olga! Then he won't go away.

WIFE. What in the world am I going to do, you little silly?

ROSE. I don't know. But you might let him kiss you as much as he
wishes.... I was watching you in the garden the other day, when he
wanted, and you didn't--and then I thought....

BARONESS. [_Entering_] Sorry to disturb you, madam, but with your
permission I should like to get into the wardrobe.

WIFE. [_Rising_] You're perfectly welcome, Baroness.

BARONESS. Oh, there is Rose.--So you are up again, and I thought you
were in bed!--Go back to your lessons at once.

ROSE. But you know, mamma, we have no school to-morrow because of the
festival.

BARONESS. You had better go anyhow, and don't bother Mr. and Mrs.
Brunner all the time.

WIFE. [_Edging toward the door in the background_] Oh, Rose is not
bothering us at all. We couldn't be better friends than we are.... We
were just going into the garden to pick some flowers, and then we meant
to try on the white dress Rose is to wear to-morrow.

ROSE. [_Disappears through the door in the background with a nod of
secret understanding to the_ WIFE] Thank you!

BARONESS. You are spoiling Rose fearfully.

WIFE. A little kindness won't spoil anybody, and least of all a girl
like Rose, who has a remarkable heart and a head to match it.

        _The_ BARONESS _is digging around in the wardrobe for
        something. The_ WIFE _stands in the doorway in the rear.
        Entering by the door at the left with a number of packages,
        the_ HUSBAND _exchanges a glance of mutual understanding with
        his wife. Then hath watch the_ BARONESS _smilingly for a
        moment. At last the_ WIFE _goes out, and the_ HUSBAND _begins
        to put his packages into the travelling-bag_.

BARONESS. Pardon me for disturbing you.... I'll be through in a
moment....

HUSBAND. Please don't mind me, Baroness.

BARONESS. [_Emerging from the wardrobe_] Are you going away again, Mr.
Brunner?

HUSBAND. I am.

BARONESS. Far?

HUSBAND. Perhaps--and perhaps not.

BARONESS. Don't you know?

HUSBAND. I never know anything about my own fate after having placed it
in the hands of another person.

BARONESS. Will you pardon me a momentary impertinence, Mr. Brunner?

HUSBAND. That depends.... You are very friendly with my wife, are you
not?

BARONESS. As friendly as two women can be with each other. But my
age, my experience of life, my temperament.... [_She checks herself
abruptly_] However--I have seen that you are unhappy, and as I have
suffered in the same way myself, I know that nothing but time will cure
your disease.

HUSBAND. Is it really I who am diseased? Is not my behaviour quite
normal? And is not my suffering caused by seeing other people behave
abnormally or--pathologically?

BARONESS. I was married to a man whom I loved.... Yes, you smile! You
think a woman cannot love because.... But I did love him, and he loved
me, and yet--he loved others, too. I suffered from jealousy so that--so
that--I made myself insufferable. He went into the war--being an
officer, you know--and he has never returned. I was told that he had
been killed, but his body was never found, and now I imagine that he
is alive and bound to another woman.--Think of it! I am still jealous
of my dead husband. At night I see him in my dreams together with that
other woman.... Have you ever known torments like that, Mr. Brunner?

HUSBAND. You may be sure I have!--But what makes you think that he is
still alive?

        [_He begins to arrange his things in the travelling-bag_.

BARONESS. A number of circumstances combined to arouse my suspicions at
one time, but for years nothing happened to revive them. Then you came
here four months ago, and, as a strange fate would have it, I noticed
at once a strong resemblance between you and my husband. It served me
as a reminder. And as my dreams took on flesh and blood, so to speak,
my old suspicions turned into certainty, and now I really believe that
he is alive? I am in a constant torment of jealousy--and that has
enabled me to understand you.

HUSBAND. [_Becoming attentive, after having listened for a while with
apparent indifference_] You say that I resemble your husband.--Won't
you be seated, Baroness?

BARONESS. [_Sits down at the table with her back to the public; the_
HUSBAND _takes a chair beside her_] He looked like you, and--barring
certain weaknesses--his character also....

HUSBAND. He was about ten years older than I.... And he had a scar on
his right cheek that looked as if it had been made by a needle....

BARONESS. That's right!

HUSBAND. Then I met your husband one night in London.

BARONESS. Is he alive?

HUSBAND. I have to figure it out--for the moment I can't tell.... Let's
see! That was five years ago--in London, as I told you. I had been to
a party--men and women--and the atmosphere had been rather depressed.
On leaving the place, I joined the first man who gave me a chance to
unburden myself. We were _en rapport_ at once, and our chat developed
into one of those endless sidewalk conversations, during which he let
me have his entire history--having first found out that I came from his
own district.

BARONESS. Then he is alive?...

HUSBAND. He was not killed in the war--that much is certain--because
he was taken prisoner. Then he fell in love with the mayor's daughter,
ran away with her to England, was deserted by his fair lady, and began
to gamble--with constant bad luck. When we separated in the morning
hours, he gave me the impression of being doomed. He made me promise
that if chance should ever put you in my way after a year had gone by,
and provided that he had not in the meantime communicated with me by
advertisement in a newspaper I am always reading, I was to consider
him dead. And when I met you, I was to kiss you on the hand, and your
daughter on the brow, saying on his behalf: "Forgive!"

        _As he kisses the hand of the_ BARONESS, ROSE _appears on the
        veranda, outside the open door, and watches them with evident
        excitement_.

BARONESS. [_Agitated_] Then he is dead?

HUSBAND. Yes, and I should have given you his message a little more
promptly, if I had not long ago forgotten the man's name as well as
the man himself. [_The_ BARONESS _is pulling at her handkerchief,
apparently unable to decide what to say or do_] Do you feel better now?

BARONESS. Yes, in a way, but all hope is gone, too.

HUSBAND. The hope of suffering those sweet torments again....

BARONESS. Besides my girl, I had nothing to interest me but my
anxiety.... How strange it is that even suffering can be missed!

HUSBAND. You'll have to pardon me, but I do think that you miss your
jealousy more than your lost husband.

BARONESS. Perhaps--because my jealousy was the invisible tie connecting
me with that image of my dreams.... And now, when I have nothing left
[_She takes hold of his hand_] You, who have brought me his last
message--you, who are a living reminder of him, and who have suffered
like me....

HUSBAND. [_Becomes restless, rises and looks at his watch_] Pardon me,
but I have to take the next train--really, I must!

BARONESS. I was going to ask you not to do so. Why should you go? Don't
you feel at home here?

        ROSE _disappears from the veranda_.

HUSBAND. Your house has brought me some of the best hours I have
experienced during these stormy years, and I leave you with the
greatest regret--but I must Baroness. On account of what happened last
night?

HUSBAND. Not that alone--it was merely the last straw.... And now I
must pack, if you'll pardon me.

        [_He turns his attention to the travelling-bag again_.

BARONESS. If your decision is irrevocable.... won't you let me help
you, as no one else is doing so?

HUSBAND. I thank you ever so much, my dear Baroness, but I am almost
done.... And I shall ask you to make our leave-taking less painful by
making it short.... In the midst of all trouble, your tender cares have
been a sweet consolation to me, and I find it almost as painful to
part from you as_--[The_ BARONESS _looks deeply moved_]--from a good
mother. I have read compassion in your glances, even when discretion
compelled you to remain silent, and I have thought at times that your
presence tended to improve my domestic happiness--as your age permitted
you to say things that a younger woman would not like to hear from one
of her own generation....

BARONESS. [_With some hesitation_] You must forgive me for saying that
your wife is no longer young....

HUSBAND. In my eyes she is.

BARONESS. But not in the eyes of the world.

HUSBAND. So much the better, although, on the other hand, I find her
coquetry the more disgusting the less her attractions correspond to her
pretensions--and if a moment comes when they begin to laugh at her....

BARONESS. They are doing so already.

HUSBAND. Really? Poor Olga! [_He looks thoughtful; then, as a single
stroke of a bell is heard from the church tower outside, he pulls
himself together_] The clock struck. I must leave in half an hour.

BARONESS. But you cannot leave without your breakfast.

HUSBAND. I am not hungry. As always, when starting on a journey, I am
so excited that my nerves tremble like telephone wires in very cold
weather....

BARONESS. Then I'll make you a cup of coffee. You'll let me do that,
won't you? And I'll send up the maid to help you pack.

HUSBAND. Your kindness is so great, Baroness, that I fear being tempted
into weaknesses that I should have to regret later on.

BARONESS. You would never regret following my advice--if you only
would! [_She goes out_.

        _The_ HUSBAND _remains alone for a few moments. Then_ ROSE
        _enters from the rear_ with a basketful of roses.

HUSBAND. Good morning, Miss Rose. What's the matter?

ROSE. Why?

HUSBAND. Why.... Because you have your head wrapped up like that.

ROSE. [_Tearing off the scarf and hiding it within her dress_] There is
nothing the matter with me. I am perfectly well. Are you going away?

HUSBAND. Yes, I am.

        _The_ MAID _enters_.

ROSE. What do you want?

MAID. The Baroness said I should help Mr. Brunner to pack.

ROSE. It isn't necessary. You can go!

        _The_ MAID _hesitates_.

ROSE. Go, I tell you!

        _The_ MAID _goes out_.

HUSBAND. Isn't that rather impolite to me, Miss Rose?

ROSE. No, it is not. I wanted to help you myself. But you are impolite
when you run away from your promise to help me with the flowers for
to-morrow's festival. Not that I care a bit--as I am not going to the
festival to-morrow, because--I don't know where I may be to-morrow.

HUSBAND. What does that mean?

ROSE. Can't I help you with something, Mr. Axel? Won't you let me brush
your hat?

        [_She picks up his hat and begins to brush it_.

HUSBAND. No, I can't let you do that, Miss Rose.

        [_He tries to take the hat away from her_.

ROSE. Let me alone! [_She puts her fingers into the hole on her sleeve
and tears it open_] There, now! You tore my dress!

HUSBAND. You are so peculiar to-day, Miss Rose, and I think your
restiveness is troubling your mother.

ROSE. Well, what do I care? I am glad if it troubles her, although I
suppose that will hurt _you_. But I don't care any more for you than
I care for the cat in the kitchen or the rats in the cellar. And if I
were your wife, I should despise you, and go so far away that you could
never find me again!--You should be ashamed of kissing another woman!
Shame on you!

HUSBAND. Oh, you saw me kissing your mother's hand, did you? Then
I must tell you that it was nothing but a final greeting from your
father, whom I met abroad after you had seen him for the last time. And
I have a greeting for you, too....

        _He goes to_ ROSE _and puts his hands about her head in order
        to kiss her brow, but_ ROSE _throws her head back so that
        her lips meet his. At that moment the_ WIFE _appears on the
        veranda, shrinks back at what she sees and disappears again_.

HUSBAND. My dear child, I meant only to give you an innocent kiss on
the brow.

ROSE. Innocent? Ha-ha! Yes, very innocent!--And you believe those
fairy-tales mother tells about father, who died several years ago! That
was a man, I tell you, who knew how to love, and who dared to make
love! He didn't tremble at the thought of a kiss, and he didn't wait
until he was asked! If you won't believe me, come with me into the
attic, and I'll let you read the letters he wrote to his mistresses....
Come! [_She opens the papered door, so that the stairs leading to the
attic become visible_] Ha-ha-ha! You're afraid that I am going to
seduce you, and you look awfully surprised ... surprised because a
girl like me, who has been a woman for three years, knows that there
is nothing innocent about love! Do you imagine that I think children
are born through the ear? Now I can see that you despise me, but you
shouldn't do that, for I am neither worse nor better than anybody
else.... I am like this!

HUSBAND. Go and change your dress before your mother comes, Miss Rose.

ROSE. Do you think I have such ugly arms? Or don't you dare to look at
them?--Now I think I know why why your wife why you are so jealous of
your wife!

HUSBAND. Well, if that isn't the limit!

ROSE. Look at him blush! On my behalf, or on your own? Do you know how
many times I have been in love?

HUSBAND. Never!

ROSE. Never with a bashful fellow like you!--Tell me, does that make
you despise me again?

HUSBAND. A little!--Take care of your heart, and don't put it where the
birds can pick at it, and where it gets--dirty. You call yourself a
woman, but you are a very young woman--a girl, in other words....

ROSE. And for that reason just for that reason.... But I can become a
woman....

HUSBAND. Until you have--I think we had better postpone conversations
of this kind. Shake hands on that, Miss Rose!

ROSE. [_With tears of anger_] Never! Never! Oh, you!

HUSBAND. Are we not going to part as friends--we who have had so many
pleasant days together during the gloomy winter and the slow spring?

WIFE. [_Enters, carrying a tray with the coffee things on it; she seems
embarrassed and pretends not to notice_ ROSE] I thought you might have
time to drink a nice cup of coffee before you leave. [ROSE _tries to
take the tray away from her_] No, my little girl, I can attend to this
myself.

HUSBAND. [_Watching his wife in a questioning and somewhat ironic
manner_] That was an excellent idea of yours....

WIFE. [_Evading his glance_] I am glad ... that....

ROSE. Perhaps I had better say good-bye now--to Mr. Brunner....

HUSBAND. So you mean to desert me now, Miss Rose....

ROSE. I suppose I must ... because ... your wife is angry with me.

WIFE. I? Why in the world....

ROSE. You promised to try on my dress....

WIFE. Not at this time, child. You can see that I have other things to
do now. Or perhaps you wish to keep my husband company while I get the
dress ready?

HUSBAND. Olga!

WIFE. What is it?

        ROSE _puts her fingers into her mouth, looking at once
        embarrassed and angry_.

WIFE. You had better dress decently, my dear young lady, if you are to
go with us to the train.

        ROSE _remains as before_.

WIFE. And suppose you take your flowers with you, if there is to be any
demonstration....

HUSBAND. That's cruel, Olga!

ROSE. [_Dropping a curtsey_] Good-bye, Mr. Brunner.

HUSBAND. [_Shaking hands with her_] Good-bye, Miss Rose. I hope you
will be happy, and that you will be a big girl soon-a very big girl.

ROSE. [_Picking up her flowers_] Good-bye, Mrs. Brunner. [_As she gets
no answer_] Good-bye! [_She runs out_.

        HUSBAND _and_ WIFE _look equally embarrassed; she tries to
        avoid looking him in the face_.

WIFE. Can I be of any help?

HUSBAND. No, thank you, I am practically done.

WIFE. And there are so many others to help you.

HUSBAND. Let me have a look at you!

        [_He tries to take hold of her head_.

WIFE. [_Escaping him_] No, leave me alone.

HUSBAND. What is it?

WIFE. Perhaps you think that I am--that I am jealous?

HUSBAND. I think so when you say it, but I could never have believed it
before.

WIFE. Of a schoolgirl like that--ugh!

HUSBAND. The character of the object seems immaterial in cases of this
kind. I felt jealous of a hired man You saw, then, that....

WIFE. That you kissed her!

HUSBAND. No, it was she who kissed me.

WIFE. How shameless! But minxes like her are regular apes!

HUSBAND. Yes, they take after the grown-up people.

WIFE. You seem to be pleased by her attentions anyhow.

HUSBAND. Little used as I am to such attentions....

WIFE. On the part of young ladies, perhaps--but you seem less timid
with the old ones....

HUSBAND. You saw that, too, did you?

WIFE. No, but Rose told me. Apparently you are quite a lady-killer.

HUSBAND. So it seems. It's too bad that I can't profit by it.

WIFE. You'll soon be free to choose a younger and prettier wife.

HUSBAND. I am not aware of any such freedom.

WIFE. Now when I am old and ugly!

HUSBAND. I can't make out what has happened. Let me have another look
at you. [_He comes close to her_.

WIFE. [_Hiding her face at his bosom_] You mustn't look at me!

HUSBAND. What in the world does this mean? You are not jealous of a
little schoolgirl or an old widow....

WIFE. I have broken--one of my front teeth. Please don't look at me!

HUSBAND. Oh, you child!--With pain comes the first tooth, and with pain
the first one goes.

WIFE. And now you'll leave me, of course?

HUSBAND. Not on your life! [_Closing the bag with a snap_] To-morrow
we'll start for Augsburg to get you a new tooth of gold.

WIFE. But we'll never come back here.

HUSBAND. Not if you say so.

WIFE. And now your fears are gone?

HUSBAND. Yes--for another week.

BARONESS. [_Enters carrying a tray; looks very embarrassed at seeing
them together_] Excuse me, but I thought....

HUSBAND. Thank you, Baroness, I have had coffee already, but for your
sake I'll have another cup. And if you--[ROSE, _dressed in white,
appears in the doorway at that moment_] and Miss Rose care to keep us
company, we have no objection. On the contrary, nothing could please
us better, as my wife and I are leaving on the first train to-morrow
morning.

_Curtain_.




GUSTAVUS VASA

(GUSTAF VASA)

HISTORIC DRAMA IN FIVE ACTS

1899


CHARACTERS


    GUSTAVUS I, _King of Sweden_
    MARGARET LEIJONHUFVUD (_Lion-Head_), _his second Queen_
    PRINCE ERIC, _the only son of the King's first marriage_
    PRINCE JOHAN, _eldest son of the King's second marriage_
    EBBA CARLSDAUGHTER, _a nun at the convent of Vreta and
       mother-in-law of the King_
    MASTER OLAVUS PETRI, _commonly known as Master Olof_
    CHRISTINE, _his wife_
    REGINALD, _their son_
    HERMAN ISRAEL, a _councillor of the free city of Luebeck_
    JACOB ISRAEL, _his son_
    MONS NILSSON OF ASPEBODA     }
    ANDERS PERSSON OF RANKHYTTAN } _free miners of Dalecarlia_
    INGHEL HANSSON               }
    NILS OF SÖDERBY              }
    JORGHEN PERSSON, _secretary to_ PRINCE ERIC
    MASTER STIG, _pastor at Copperberg (Falun), Dalecarlia_
    MONS NILSSON'S WIFE
    BARBRO, _his daughter_
    AGDA, a _barmaid_
    KARIN MONSDAUGHTER, a _flower girl_
    MARCUS }
    DAVID  } _Hanseatic clerks_
    ENGELBRECHT, a _free miner who was one of the Dalecarlian
    ski-runners that overtook_ GUSTAVUS VASA _on his flight to
    Norway and brought him back to head the Dalecarlian revolt
    against King Christian II of Denmark_
    CAPTAIN OF THE GUARD
    A COURTIER
    A MESSENGER
    TWO BEGGARS


SCENARIO

    ACT   I.           THE HOUSE OF MONS NILSSON AT COPPERBERG
    ACT  II. SCENE  I. THE HANSEATIC OFFICE AT STOCKHOLM
             SCENE II. THE BLUE DOVE INN
    ACT III.           THE KING'S STUDY
    ACT  IV. SCENE  I. SQUARE IN FRONT OF THE HANSEATIC OFFICE
             SCENE II. THE STUDY OF MASTER OLAVUS
    ACT   V.           THE GARDEN TERRACE IN FRONT OF THE ROYAL PALACE
                         AT STOCKHOLM


ACT I


        _The main living-room in_ MONS NILSSON'S _house at Copperberg
        (which is the old name of the present city of Falun in
        Dalecarlia)._

        _There is a door in the rear, with a window on either side,
        through which are visible small city houses with snow-covered
        roofs and the flames belching from many blast-furnaces. A large
        open fireplace with mantelpiece occupies the center of the
        right wall. A fine log fire is going in the fireplace. On the
        same side, nearer the footlights, is a door_.

        _A long tablefills the middle of the floor. At its farther
        end stands an armchair with cushions on the seat and bright
        textiles draped over the back and the arm supports. Wooden
        benches run along the two long sides of the table_.

        _Wooden seats are placed along the left wall_.

        _Above the wainscotting of the walls appear large, simple
        frescoes depicting the adventures of_ GUSTAVUS VASA _in
        Dalecarlia (at the beginning of the war of liberation). The one
        at the left of the rear door shows him at the home of Master
        John at Svärdsjö; the one at the right pictures him threshing
        in the barn of_ ANDERS PERSSON OF RANKHYTTAN _(while Danish
        soldiers are searching the place for him)_.

        _The ringing of a church-bell is heard from the outside as the
        curtain rises_.

        MONS NILSSON _is seated at the table, writing. His_ WIFE _is
        arranging tankards and beakers of silver on the mantelshelf_.


MONS. That's four o'clock, is it not?

WIFE. Of course.

MONS. Sounds like fire.

WIFE. Is that any special sound?

MONS. Yes, it sounds like "help-help, help-help!"

WIFE. That's the way it has sounded ever since the King carried off our
bells, it seems to me.

MONS. Be quiet! And don't talk behind anybody's back. The King will
soon be here himself.

WIFE. Has the King sent word of his visit, as you have put everything
in order to receive him?

MONS. Not exactly, but when he sends word that he is coming to
Copperberg, it is not to be expected that he will pass by his friend
Mons Nilsson, who helped him in the days of trial, and who has stood by
him both against Master Knut and Peder the Chancellor, not to speak of
the False Sture.[1] And he acted as godfather for my girl besides.

WIFE. That was a good while ago; but when the King's bailiff came here
to get the bells two years ago, you helped to kill him.

MONS. That was two years ago, and I guess he was set on having our
heads at that time. But just then King Christian broke into the country
from Norway. Our own King turned meek as a lamb at once, and when he
asked us for help, we Dalecarlians stood by him like one man, and gave
him all the help he wanted. So I think we can call it even.

WIFE. So _you_ think, but the King never calls it even except when it
is to his own advantage.

MONS. Perhaps not. But as long as Christian still is free, he will not
dare to break with us.

WIFE. Well, is Christian still free?

MONS. I have heard nothing to the contrary. Anyhow, the King owes us
such a lot of money that, leaving old friendship aside....

WIFE. God bless you! And I hope He will protect you from the friend
that is always breaking his word and safe-conduct!

MONS. Don't open the old wounds, but let bygones be bygones.

WIFE. If you do that, and he won't, you can hardly call it a
reconciliation. Take care!

MONS. The sound of that bell is really dreadful!

WIFE. So it is to my ears, because it always reminds me of the big
Mary, which the bailiff took away. Do you remember when the Mary was
cast out of the best refined copper and the whole town brought milk and
cream to give the clay of the form more firmness--and then, when the
melt was ready, we threw in one-half of our table silver to improve the
tone? It was baptised at Candlemas and rung for the first time at the
burial of my father.... And then it went to Herman Israel at Luebeck,
who made coin out of it.

MONS. All that is perfectly true, but now it _must_ be forgotten--or we
shall never have peace.

BARBRO, _their daughter, enters with a basket full of finely chopped
spruce branches; she is dressed in black and white, and so are several
younger children who follow her, also carrying baskets. All of them
begin to spread the chopped spruce over the floor_.

WIFE. [_To_ MONS] Is there to be a funeral?

MONS. No, but not being the season, we couldn't get any leaves.

WIFE. I think the children might put off their mourning at least.

MONS. No, that's just what they should not do, because when the King
asks whom they are mourning--well, what are you to answer, Barbro?

BARBRO. "We mourn our beloved teacher, Pastor John at Svärdsjö."

MONS. And what are you to say, if the King asks you why?

BARBRO. "Because he was an early friend of King Gustavus and saved his
precious life for our country."

MONS. What year was that?

BARBRO. "The very year when Christian the Tyrant cut the head off the
Swedish nobility."[2]

MONS. That's right, children. And over there you see the picture of
Master John when he is holding the towel for the outlaw who has been
threshing in the barn. [_To his_ WIFE] On the other hand, it is not
necessary to tell the children that the King took his friend's head two
years ago.

WIFE. Have you really that much sense left?--Do you think the King
likes any reminder of a deed that has brought him so little honour?

MONS. Let him like it or dislike it, he'll have to swallow it. It was
an ugly deed, and Master John was a saint and a martyr, who died for
his faith--the faith of his childhood, which he would not forswear.

BARBRO. [_Standing by the armchair at the end of the table_] Is the
King to sit here?

MONS. Yes, child, that's where the marvellous man of God is to sit
when he visits his friend Mons Nilsson of Aspeboda. His whole life is
like a miracle story, children: how the Lord guided him out of a Danish
prison up to Dalecarlia, and how, after many hardships, he finally
freed his country from oppression. Those pictures on the walls tell you
the whole story, down to the moment when the ski-runner overtook him at
Sälen, close by the Norwegian border-line.

BARBRO. [_Looking at the picture just indicated_] Is it true, father,
that the ski-runner was named Engelbrecht, like the great chieftain we
had in the past century?

MONS. Yes, it's true, child, and we used to speak of it as "the finger
of God," but now we call it mere superstition.

WIFE. Don't put that sort of thing into the children's heads!

MONS. Oh, keep quiet! I teach the children nothing but what is right
and proper.--And bear in mind, little girls, that, no matter what you
may hear, you must never believe or say anything bad of the King. Earth
bears no heavier burden than a thankless man. And for that reason you
must sing the ballad of King Gustav when he comes here. Do you still
remember it?

BARBRO. Oh, yes!

MONS. Let me hear you read it then.

BARBRO. [_Reciting_],

    "King Gustav, he rode his trusty steed
       Across the battle-field;
     Have thanks, my brave Dalecarlians,
       For your true loyalty."

CHILDREN. [_In chorus_],

    "Have thanks, my brave Dalecarlians,
       For your true loyalty!"

BARBRO.

    "You have by my side been fighting
       Like faithful Swedish men.
     If God will spare my life-blood,
       I'll do you good in stead."

CHILDREN.

    "If God will spare my life-blood,
       I'll do you good in stead!"

MONS. That's good, children. Go back to your own room now, and be ready
when the time comes.

BARBRO _and the_ CHILDREN. [_As they start to go out to the right_] But
won't the King frighten us?

MONS. Oh, he is not at all dangerous, and he is very fond of children.
Besides, he is your godfather, Barbro.

        BARBRO _and the_ CHILDREN _leave the room_.

WIFE. Do you know what you are doing?

MONS. Hope so! Of course, I know what you mean?

WIFE. What do I mean?

MONS. That I should take your advice. So I have done in the past, and
it has ended badly every time.

WIFE. Try it once more!

MONS. No!

WIFE. Then--may the will of God be done! [_Pause_,

MONS. That's the longest afternoon I have ever lived through!--And my
friends don't seem to be coming.

WIFE. Yes, I think I hear them outside.

MONS. Well, you were right that time!

        _The stamping of feet is heard from the hallway outside_. _Then
        enter_: ANDERS PERSSON OF RANKHYTTAN, NILS SÖDERBY, INGHEL
        HANSSON, _and_ MASTER STIG [_in clerical costume_]. _Each one
        says as he comes into the room_: "Good evening, everybody!"

MONS. [_Shaking hands with them_] God be with you, Anders Persson! God
be with you, Nils Söderby! God be with you, Inghel Hansson! God be with
you, Master Stig! Come forward and be seated.

        _All seat themselves at the long table_.

ANDERS. You are getting ready, I see.

MONS. So we are.--And where's the King?

ANDERS. The other side of the hill, says the ski-runner that just
returned.

MONS. As near as that?--And what errand is supposed to bring him here?

ANDERS. Ask Nils of Söderby.

NILS. They say he is headed for Norway to fight Christian.

INGHEL. There are others who think that he is coming to thank us
Dalecarlians for the good help rendered in his last fight.

STIG. That would not be like him.

ANDERS. To thank anybody--no, indeed!

MONS. Do you think there is any cause for fear?

NILS. Not while Christian is still free.

INGHEL. It's queer that we should have to look to Christian for safety.

STIG. We knew what we had, but not what we might get. Christian took
the heads of the noble lords and left the people alone. This one leaves
the lords alone and rides roughshod over the people. Who should be
called a tyrant?

MONS. Be quiet now!

ANDERS. In other words, the last war of liberation was fought _against_
our liberator. Did we know at all what we were doing at that time?

INGHEL. We were to clear the country of the Danes; and the first man to
raise his hand for the King against the Danes in our parts was Rasmus
Dane, who killed Nils Westgoth. That was a strange beginning....

NILS. A strange beginning, indeed, but just like the ending. [_To_
MONS'S WIFE] Look out for the silver, goodwife!

        _She turns and looks inquiringly at him_.

NILS. The King is coming.

MONS. In the name of the Lord, be quiet! That kind of talk will bring
no peace.--All that you say is true, of course, but what has happened
was the will of Providence--

STIG. Which let the children have their will in order that they should
see their own folly.

ANDERS. Are you quite sure that the King will visit you, Mons Nilsson?

MONS. What a question!

ANDERS. Remember Master John!

MONS. Let us forget! Everything must be forgotten.

ANDERS. No wonder if you and NILS want to forget that you burned the
King's house at Hedemora and looted Räfvelstad two years ago! But _he_
will never forget it.

        _The roll of muffled drums is heard from the outside_.

ALL. [_Leaping to their feet_] What's that?

MONS. Don't you know the hornet that buzzes before it stings?

ANDERS. That's the kind of noise he made that Ash Wednesday at Tuna
Flat.

INGHEL. Don't mention that blood-bath, or I can't control myself.
[_Passionately_] Don't talk of it!

NILS. Hear him spinning, spinning like a cat! No, don't trust him!

        _The roll of the drums comes nearer_.

STIG. Might it not be wise for you, as personal friends of the King, to
meet him and bid the stem master welcome?

MONS. I wonder. Then he might not come here afterward....

WIFE. Stay, Mons! Stay where you are!

MONS. Oh, the place smells of spruce, and the drums are flattened
as for a funeral. [_Somebody raps three times at the door from the
outside_] Who's that?

        [_He goes to the door and opens it_.

WIFE. [_To_ Master Stig _as she leaves the room by the door_ _at__the
right_] Pray for us!

        MASTER OLAVUS _and_ HERMAN ISRAEL _enter_.

MONS. Who is doing me the honour?

OLAVUS. I am the acting secretary of his Highness, the King. And this
is the venerable representative of the free city of Luebeck.

MONS. Come in, my good sirs, and--let us hear the news!

OLAVUS. The King is here and has pitched his camp on Falu Flat.
Personally he has taken his abode at the Gildhall of Saint Jorghen.

MONS. What is the errand that has made the King cross Långhed Forest
and Brunbeck Ford without permission and safe-conduct?[3]

OLAVUS. He hasn't told.

MONS. Then I had better go and ask him.

OLAVUS. With your leave, this is the message our gracious lord, the
King, sends you through us: "Greetings to the goodly miners of the
Copperberg, and let every man stay in his own house." If he desires
speech with any one, that one will be called.

MONS. What is the meaning of it?

OLAVUS. [_Seating himself_] I don't know. [_Pause_.

ANDERS. Has the Danish war come to an end, sir?

OLAVUS. I don't know.

ANDERS. Do you know with whom you are talking?

OLAVUS. No, I don't.

ANDERS. I am Anders Persson of Rankhyttan. Have you ever heard that
name before?

OLAVUS. Yes--it's a good name.

        HERMAN ISRAEL _has in the meantime been studying the wall
        paintings and the silver on the mantelpiece. He wears a pair of
        large, horn-rimmed eye-glasses. At last he seats himself in the
        armchair at the end of the table_.

MONS. [_Indicating_ ISRAEL _to_ OLAVUS] Is that chap from Luebeck a
royal person, too?

OLAVUS. [_In a low voice_] No, he is not, but he is in charge of the
national debt, and we must never forget that our gracious King was able
to free our country of the Danes _only_ with the help of Luebeck.

MONS. With the help of Luebeck _only_? And how about the Dalecarlians?

OLAVUS. Oh, of course, they helped, too.

MONS. Does he speak Swedish?

OLAVUS. I don't think so, but I am not sure of it.

MONS. Is that so?

OLAVUS. We happened to arrive together, but I have not yet spoken to
him.

MONS. Very strange! I suppose the King has sent him?

OLAVUS. Probably.

MONS. Perhaps he is the fellow who buys up the bells?

OLAVUS. Perhaps.

MONS. And the church silver?

OLAVUS. And the church silver, too!

MONS. What was his name again?

OLAVUS. Herman Israel.

MONS. Oh, Israel!

        _He whispers to_ ANDERS PERSSON, _who in turn whispers to the
        rest_.

        _A rap at the door is heard_. MASTER OLAVUS _gets up quickly
        and opens the door_.

        _A_ MESSENGER _in full armour enters, whispers something to_
        MASTER OLAVUS, _and leaves again_.

OLAVUS. Our gracious lord, the King, requests Inghel Hansson to meet
him at Saint Jorghen's Gild.

INGHEL. [_Rising_] Well, well, am I to be the first?

NILS. The oldest first.

MONS. Stand up for yourself, Inghel, and tell the truth. The King is a
gracious gentleman who won't mind a plain word in proper time.

INGHEL. Don't you worry. I have said my say to kings before now. [_He
goes out_.

OLAVUS. Well, Nils, how is the mining nowadays?

NILS. Not bad, thank you. The last fall flood left a little water in
the mine, but otherwise we have nothing to complain of.

OLAVUS. Times are good, then?

NILS. Well, you might say so.... Hm! Good times will mean better taxes,
I suppose?

OLAVUS. I know nothing about the taxes. [_Pause; then to_ ANDERS
PERSSON] And how about the crops? I hear you have plenty of tilled
ground, too.

ANDERS. Oh, yes, and plenty of cattle in the pastures, too.

OLAVUS. Old Dalecarlia is a pretty good country, is it not?

MONS. [_Giving_ ANDERS _a poke with his elbow_] Yes, everything is fat
here--dripping with fat, so that one can eat the bark off the trees
even.

OLAVUS. Yes, they have told me that you have to eat bark and chew
resin now and then. Is that a common thing or does it happen only once
in a while?

NILS. When the famine comes, you have to eat what you can get.

OLAVUS. [_To_ MASTER STIG, _who has been keeping in the background_]
There is something you should know, Master Stig. How was it during the
last famine, when the King sent grain to be distributed here: did it go
to those who needed it?

STIG. Yes, it did, although there was not enough of it.

OLAVUS. [_To_ ANDERS] Was there not enough of it?

ANDERS. That depends on what you mean by "enough."

OLAVUS. [_To_ MONS] Do you know what is meant by "enough," Mons Nilsson?

MONS. Oh, well, everybody knows that.

OLAVUS. [_To_ STIG] As we now know what is meant by "enough," I ask
you, Master Stig Larsson, if anybody perished from hunger during the
last famine?

STIG. Man doth not live by bread only....

OLAVUS. There you spoke a true word, Master Stig, but....

        _A rap on the door is heard_. MASTER OLAVUS _opens. The same_
        MESSENGER _appears, whispers to him, and leaves again_.

OLAVUS. The King requests Nils Söderby to meet him at Saint Jorghen's
Gildhall.

NILS. Won't Inghel Hansson come back first?

OLAVUS. I don't know.

NILS. Well, nobody is afraid here, and....

OLAVUS. What have you to be afraid of?

NILS. Nothing! [_To his friends_] The big bell at Mora has not been
taken out of Siljan valley yet, Anders Persson and Mons Nilsson. That's
a devil of a bell, and when it begins to tinkle, they can hear it way
over in Norway, and fourteen thousand men stand like one!

OLAVUS. I don't understand what you mean.

NILS. [_Shaking hands with_ ANDERS _and_ MONS] But you two understand!
God bless you and defend you!

MONS. What do you mean?

ANDERS. What are you thinking of, Nils?

NILS. Oh, my thoughts are running so fast that I can't keep up with
them. But one thing I am sure of: that it's going hard with Inghel
Hansson. [_He goes out_.

OLAVUS. Is this sulphur smoke always hanging over the place?

MONS. Mostly when the wind is in the east.

        MONS _and_ ANDERS _withdraw to the left corner of the room
        and sit down there. Master Stig shows plainly that he is much
        alarmed_.

OLAVUS. Is it the quartz or the pyrites that make the worst smoke?

ANDERS. Why do you ask?

OLAVUS. That's a poor answer!

MONS. May I ask you in return whether King Christian still is free?

OLAVUS. [_Looking hard at him_] Do you put your trust in the enemy?
[_Pause_] What kind of a man is Nils of Söderby?

MONS. His friends think him better and his enemies worse than anybody
else.

OLAVUS. What kind of a bell in the Siljan valley was that you spoke of?

MONS. It's the largest one in all Dalecarlia.

OLAVUS. Have you many bells of that kind?

ANDERS. Of the kind that calls the people to arms we have still a lot.

        MONS _pokes him warningly_.

OLAVUS. I am glad to hear it, and I am sure it will please his Highness
still more.--Are the people attending church diligently, Master Stig?

STIG. I can't say that they are.

OLAVUS. Are the priests bad, or is the pure word of God not preached
here?

STIG. There are no bad priests here, and nothing but the pure word of
God is preached!

OLAVUS. That's the best thing I have heard yet! Nothing but the pure
word of God, you say! [_Pause_] Nils intimated a while ago that
fourteen thousand men will take up arms when you ring the big bell at
Mora. That was mere boasting, I suppose?

MONS. Oh, if you ring it the right way, I think sixteen thousand will
come. What do you say, Anders Persson?

ANDERS. Sixteen, you say? I should say eighteen!

OLAVUS. Fine! Then we shall ring it the right way when the Dane comes
next time. Only seven thousand answered the last call--to fight the
_enemies_ of our country.

MONS. [_To_ ANDERS] That fellow is dangerous. We had better keep quiet
after this.

STIG. [_To_ OLAVUS] Why has Inghel Hansson not come back?

OLAVUS. I don't know.

STIG. Then I'll go and find out.

        _He goes to the door and opens it, but is stopped by the_
        MESSENGER, _who is now accompanied by several pike-men_.

        MASTER OLAVUS _meets the_ MESSENGER, _who whispers to him_.

OLAVUS. Master Stig Larsson is commanded before the King at once!

STIG. Commanded? Who commands here?

OLAVUS. The King.

MONS. [_Leaping to his feet_] Treachery!

OLAVUS. Exactly: treachery and traitors!--If you don't go at once,
Master Stig, you'll ride bareback!

STIG. To hell!

OLAVUS. Yes, _to_ hell!--Away!

        MONS _and_ ANDERS _rise and start for the door_.

MONS. Do you know who I am--that I am a free miner and a friend of the
King?

OLAVUS. Be seated then, and keep your peace. If you are a friend of
the King, there has been a mistake. Sit down, Anders Persson and Mons
Nilsson! No harm will befall you or anybody else who is innocent.
Let Master Stig go, and don't get excited. Where does the thought of
violence come from, if not from your own bad conscience?

STIG. That's true. We have done nothing wrong, and no one has
threatened us.--Be quiet, friends. I shall soon be back. [_He goes out_.

MONS. That's right!

OLAVUS. Throw a stick at the pack, and the one that is hit will yelp.

ANDERS. [_To_ MONS] That was stupid of us! Let us keep calm! [_Aloud_]
You see, doctor, one gets suspicious as one grows old, particularly
after having seen so many broken words and promises....

OLAVUS. I understand. In these days, when people change masters as
the snake changes its skin, a certain instability of mind is easily
produced. In young men it may be pardonable, but it is absolutely
unpardonable in old and experienced persons.

MONS. As far as age is concerned, there is nothing to say about the
King, who still is in his best years....

OLAVUS. And for that reason pardonable....

MONS. [_To_ ANDERS] I think he must be the devil himself!

ANDERS. [_To_ OLAVUS] How long are we to wait here? And what are we to
wait for?

OLAVUS. The King's commands, as you ought to know.

MONS. Are we regarded as prisoners, then?

OLAVUS. By no means, but it is not wise to venture out for a while yet.

        MONS _and_ ANDERS _move from one chair to another and give
        other evidence of agitation_.

MONS. Some great evil is afoot. I can feel it within me.

ANDERS. It must be very hot in here.... I am sweating. Would you like a
glass of beer, doctor?

OLAVUS. No, thank you.

ANDERS. Or a glass of wine?

OLAVUS. Not for me, thanks!

MONS. But it's real hock.

        MASTER OLAVUS _shakes his head. At that moment drum-beats are
        heard outside_.

ANDERS. [_Beyond himself_] In the name of Christ, will this never come
to an end?

OLAVUS. [_Rising_] Yes, this is the end!

        _He goes to the door and opens it_.

        _The_ MESSENGER _enters and throws on the table the
        bloodstained coats of_ INGHEL HANSSON, NILS OF SÖDERBY, _and_
        MASTER STIG.

OLAVUS. Look!

MONS _and_ ANDERS. Another blood-bath!

MONS. Without trial or hearing!

OLAVUS. The trial took place two years age, and sentence was passed.
But the King put mercy above justice and let the traitors remain
at large to see whether their repentance was seriously meant. When
he learned that they remained incorrigible and went on with their
rebellious talk as before, he decided to execute the sentences. That's
how the matter looks when presented truthfully.

MONS. And yet there was a lot of talk about everything being forgiven
and forgotten....

OLAVUS. So it was, provided the same offence was not repeated. But it
was repeated, and what might have been forgotten was again remembered.
All that is clear as logic. [_To_ HERMAN ISRAEL] These two trustworthy
men.... [_To_ MONS _and_ ANDERS] You are trustworthy, are you not?

MONS _and_ ANDERS. Hope so!

OLAVUS. Answer yes or no! Are you trustworthy?

MONS _and_ ANDERS. Yes!

OLAVUS. [_To_ ISRAEL] In the presence of you as my witness, syndic,
these two trustworthy men have given a true report of conditions in
Dalecarlia. They have unanimously assured us that the mines are being
worked profitably; that agriculture and cattle-breeding prosper no
less than the mining; that famines occur but rarely, and that, during
the last one, our gracious King distributed grain in quantities not
insufficient, which went to those that really were in need. These
trustworthy and upright miners have also confirmed the following
facts: that bells to summon the congregations still remain in all the
churches; that no bad priests are spreading devices of men, and that
nothing is preached here but the pure word of God. You have likewise
heard them say, syndic, that the province of Dalecarlia can raise from
sixteen to eighteen thousand men capable of bearing arms--the figures
vary as their courage falls or rises. Being in charge of the current
debt, and for that reason entitled to know the actual _status_ of the
country, you have now heard the people declare with their own lips,
that all the Dalecarlian grievances are unwarranted, and that those who
have spread reports to the contrary are traitors and liars.

MONS. _Veto!_

ANDERS. I deny it!

OLAVUS. If you deny your own words, then you are liars twice over!

MONS. He is drawing the noose tighter! Better keep silent!

ANDERS. No, I most speak. [_To_ OLAVUS] I want to know what our fate is
to be.

OLAVUS. So you shall. Your fate is in your own hands. You are invited
to Stockholm and given full safe-conduct. You can travel freely by
yourselves. This is granted you as old friends of the King, to whom he
acknowledges a great debt of gratitude.

MONS. More guile!

OLAVUS. No guile at all. Here is the King's safe-conduct, signed by his
own hand.

ANDERS. We know all about his safe-conducts!

MONS. [_To_ ANDERS] We must consent and submit in order to gain time!
[_To_ OLAVUS] Will you let us go into the next room and talk the matter
over?

OLAVUS. You can now go wherever you want--except to the King.

        MONS _and_ ANDERS _go toward the left_.

MONS. [_As he opens the door_] We'll bring you an answer shortly.

OLAVUS. As you please, and when you please.

        MONS _and_ ANDERS _go out_.

OLAVUS. [_To_ ISRAEL] A stiff-necked people, true as gold, but full of
distrust.

ISRAEL. A very fine people.

OLAVUS. Rather stupid, however. Did you notice how I trapped them?

ISRAEL. That was good work. How did you learn to do it?

OLAVUS. By long observation of innumerable human beings I have been led
to conclude at last that vanity the primal sin and mother of all the
vices. To get the truth out of criminals, I have merely to set them
boasting.

ISRAEL. What wisdom! What wisdom! And you are not yet an old man!--But
there are modest people, too, and out of these you cannot get the
truth, according to what you have just said.

OLAVUS. Modest people boast of their modesty, so that is all one.

ISRAEL. [_Looking attentively at him_] If you'll pardon me--Master
Olavus was your name, I think? You cannot be Olavus Petri?

OLAVUS. I am.

ISRAEL. [_Surprised_] Who carried out the Reformation?

OLAVUS. I am that man.

ISRAEL. And who was subsequently tried for high treason on suspicion of
having known about a plot against the King's life?

OLAVUS. Confidences given me under the seal of confession, so that I
had no right to betray them.

ISRAEL. [_Gazing curiously at_ OLAVUS] Hm-hm! [_Pause_] A mysterious
story it was, nevertheless.

OLAVUS. No, I don't think so. Gorius Holst and Hans Bökman were found
guilty. And it was so little of a secret, that the people of Hamburg
heard of the King's murder as an accomplished fact long before the plot
was exposed at Stockholm.

ISRAEL. That is just what I call mysterious, especially as we knew
nothing about it at Luebeck.

OLAVUS. Yes, I call that mysterious, too, because the road to Hamburg
goes through Luebeck as a rule. [ISRAEL _makes no reply_] And it was
rumoured at the time, that Marcus Meyer and Juerghen Wollenweber were
no strangers to the plot.

ISRAEL. I have never heard of it, and I don't believe it. [_Pause;
then, pointing to the blood-stained coats_] Must those things stay here?

OLAVUS. Yes, for the present.

ISRAEL. It seems to me that these royal visits are rather sanguinary
affairs.

OLAVUS. I don't allow myself to pass judgment on the actions of my
King, partly because I am not capable of doing so, and partly because I
know there is a judge above too, who guides his destiny.

ISRAEL. That is beautifully said and thought. Have you always been
equally wise?

OLAVUS. No, but what you have not been you frequently become. [_Pause_.

ISRAEL. Won't those people in there try to get away?

OLAVUS. That, too, has been foreseen, just as their desire to discuss
the matter had been reckoned with. Do you know what they are talking of?

ISRAEL. No, I have not the slightest idea.

OLAVUS. They still imagine that King Christian is free, and they are
planning to seek help from him.

ISRAEL. What a senseless thought!

OLAVUS. Especially as Christian is a prisoner.

ISRAEL. It sounds like madness, but when you hear how devoted these
good men of the mining districts are to their King, it cannot surprise
you that they may have in mind the oath binding them to their only
lawful sovereign....

OLAVUS. Now, with your pardon, I _am_ surprised....

ISRAEL. Oh, mercy, I am merely putting myself in their place.

OLAVUS. It is always dangerous to put oneself in the place of traitors.
[_Pause_.

BARBRO. [_Entering from the right, followed by the smaller children_]
Is father here? [_She looks around and discovers_ ISRAEL _seated in the
armchair prepared for the King_] Goodness, here is the King!

        [_She kneels, the other children following her example_.

ISRAEL. No, no, dear children, I am not the King. I am only a poor
merchant from Luebeck.

OLAVUS. A noble answer! [_To the children_] This is Herman Israel, the
far-famed and influential councillor, who, with Cord König and Nils
Bröms, saved our King out of Danish captivity and enabled him to carry
out the war of liberation. You will find him on the picture in Saint
Jorghen's Gildhall which represents Gustavus Vasa appearing before the
City Council of Luebeck. Honour to the man who has honour deserved.
Give homage to the friend of your country and your King.

        BARBRO _and the_ CHILDREN _clap their hands_.

ISRAEL. [_Rises, evidently touched_] My dear little friends.... All I
can do is to thank you.... I have really not deserved this.... You see,
a merchant does nothing except for payment, and I have been richly paid.

OLAVUS. Don't believe him! But bear in mind that there are services
that can never be paid, and beautiful deeds that can never be wiped out
by ingratitude or forgetfulness.--Go back to your own room now. Your
father will come in a moment.

        BARBRO _and the_ CHILDREN _go out to the right_.

ISRAEL. I had never expected such a thing of you, doctor.

OLAVUS. I think I understand why. However, my dear syndic, don't ever
compel us to become ungrateful. Ingratitude is such a heavy burden to
carry.

ISRAEL. What is the use of talking of it? There is nothing of that kind
to be feared.

        MONS NILSSON _and_ ANDERS PERSSON _enter from the left_.

MONS. After talking it over, we have decided to go to Stockholm with
the King's good word and safe-conduct, so that we can quietly discuss
the matter with him and the lords of the realm.

OLAVUS. Then my errand here is done, and both of us can leave. I wish
you, Mons Nilsson, and you, Anders Persson, welcome to the capital.

MONS. Thank you, doctor.

        MASTER OLAVUS _and_ HERMAN ISRAEL _go out_.

MONS. [_Picking up the bloodstained coats as soon as they are out of
sight_] These shall be our blood-stained banners! King Christian will
furnish the staffs, and then--on to Stockholm!

ANDERS. And down with it!

OLAVUS. [_Returning unexpectedly_] There was one thing I forgot to tell
you. Do you hear?

ANDERS. [_Angrily_] Well!

OLAVUS. King Christian has been captured and made a prisoner at
Sonderborg Castle, in the island of Als.

        MONS _and_ ANDERS _show how deeply the news hits them; neither
        one has a word to say_.

OLAVUS. You understand, don't you?--Stinderborg Castle, in the island
of Als?

_Curtain_.


[1] Peder Jacobsson Sunnanväder, bishop at Vesterås, and his
archdeacon, Master Knut, both members of the old Catholic clergy, tried
to raise the Dalecarlians against the King in 1524-5, when his hold
on the new throne was still very precarious. The False Sture was a
young Dalecarlian named John Hansson, who had acquired gentle manners
as a servant in noble houses and who posed as the natural son of Sten
Sture the Younger, "National Director" of Sweden until 1520. This
pretender, who headed another Dalecarlian uprising in 1527, figures
also in Ibsen's early historical drama, "Lady Inger." The taking of the
church-bells mentioned by Mons Nilsson's wife took place in 1531 and
resulted in the killing of several of the King's representatives by the
Dalecarlians.

[2] In 1520 Christian II of Denmark made a temporarily successful
effort to bring Sweden back into the union with the other two
Scandinavian kingdoms. Having defeated the Swedish "National Director,"
Sten Sture the Younger, and been admitted to the city of Stockholm,
he caused about eighty of the most influential members of the Swedish
nobility to be beheaded in a single day. That was the "Blood-bath of
Stockholm," by which King Gustavus lost his father and brother-in-law.
On the same occasion his mother and sister were imprisoned, and both
died before they could be set free.

[3] Långheden is a wooded upland plain on the southern border of
Dalecarlia. Brunbeck Ferry or Ford was for centuries the main crossing
point of the Dal River for all who entered the province of Dalecarlia
from the south. Rendered arrogant by the part they had played in
the wars of liberation between 1434 and 1524, the Dalecarlians had
established a claim that not even the King himself had the right to
pass those two border points at the head of an armed force without
first having obtained their permission.




ACT II



FIRST SCENE


        _The office of_ HERMAN ISRAEL. _A large room, the walls of
        which are covered by cupboards. Door in the rear; doors in both
        side walls; few windows, and these very small. A fireplace on
        the left-hand side. A large table in the middle of the floor;
        armchairs about it. Above the rear door and the fireplace
        appears the coat of arms of Luebeck, in black, red, and silver_.

        _At the right, a desk with writing material and a pair of
        scales. The room contains also several sets of shelves filled
        with goods in bundles_.

        _One of the cupboard doors stands open, disclosing a number of
        altar vessels of gold and silver_.

        MARCUS _is weighing some of the vessels at the desk, while_
        DAVID _is noting down the weights given him_.


MARCUS. A crucifix of silver, gilded; weighs twelve ounces.

DAVID. [_Writing_] Twelve ounces....

MARCUS. Item: a monstrance of gold--a perfect thumper. Weighs.... Let
me see now.... Oh, it's hollow--and the base is filled with lead....
Put down a question-mark.

DAVID. Question-mark it is.

MARCUS. A paten of silver--well, I don't know. [_He tests the vessel
with his teeth_] It tastes like copper at least. Put it down as "white
metallic substance."

DAVID. White metallic substance.--Do you think those rustics are
cheating us?

MARCUS. Us? Nobody can cheat us!

DAVID. Don't be too certain. Niegels Bröms, the goldsmith, says that
interlopers from Holland are going through the country selling church
vessels full of coggery, probably meant to be exchanged for the genuine
goods.

MARCUS. We'll have to get it back on the bells, which contain a lot of
silver, according to old traditions.

DAVID. The bells--yes, they were to go to Luebeck, but instead they are
going to the royal gun-foundry to be cast into culverins and bombards.

MARCUS. So it is said. If only the Dalecarlians knew of it, they would
come galloping across the border forests, I suppose.

DAVID. I think their galloping came to an end with the recent fall
slaughter.

MARCUS. No, there will be no end to it while the two blackest rogues
are still at leisure....

DAVID. You mean Mons Nilsson of Aspeboda and Anders Persson of
Rankhyttan, who are still hanging about the town, hoping to get an
audience with the King?

MARCUS. Those are the ones.

DAVID. Calling them rogues is rather an exaggeration, and our Principal
seems to put great store on them.

MARCUS. Now, David, don't forget the first and last duty of a Hanseatic
clerk--which is to keep his mouth closed. And bear in mind the
number of talkative young fellows who have vanished for ever through
water-gates and cellar holes. You had better remember!

DAVID. I'll try, although it seems about time for the Hansa itself to
be thinking of the great silence. [_Pause_.

MARCUS. Do you know where the Principal is?

DAVID. With the King, I suppose, taking an inventory of Eskil's
Chamber.[1]

JACOB ISRAEL. [_Enters; he is the son of_ HERMAN ISRAEL; _a richly
dressed young man, carrying a racket in his hand; his forehead is
bandaged_] Is my father here?

MARCUS. No, he is not. I think the Principal is with the King.

JACOB. Then I'll sit down here and wait. Go on with your writing. I
won't disturb you.

        [_He seats himself at the big table_.

PRINCE ERIC. [_Enters; he is somewhat older than_ JACOB] Why did you
leave me, Jacob?

JACOB. I was tired of playing.

ERIC. I don't think that was the reason. Some one offended you--some
one who is not my friend.

JACOB. No one has offended me, Prince, but I have such a strong feeling
that I ought not to appear at court.

ERIC. Oh, Jacob, my friend, why do you cease to call your old
schoolmate by name? And why do you look at me like a stranger? Give
me your hand You won't? And I, who have been lonely and deserted ever
since my mother died; who am hated by my stepmother, by my father, and
by my half-brother; I am begging for the friendship which you gave me
once and which you are now taking back.

JACOB. I am not taking back anything, Eric, but we are not allowed
to be friends. The fact that we two, as mere boys, formed ties of
friendship that were nursed by common sufferings, has been ignored or
tolerated by our fathers so far. Now, when you are about to marry a
foreign princess and take possession of a duchy, it has been deemed
politic to separate us.

ERIC. Your words are stilted, as if you meant to hide your own
thoughts, but your feelings are not to be concealed....

JACOB. Pardon me, Eric, but this is not the place for a conversation
like this....

ERIC. Because this is a place for trading, you mean--as if the parties
to such a transaction were degraded by it? I don't object to it,
although I am rather inclined to think the seller more broad-minded
than the buyer.

        JACOB _indicates by a gesture the presence of the two clerks_.

ERIC. Oh, let them hear. Marcus and I are old friends, and we met at
the Blue Dove last night.

JACOB. Ugh! Why do you visit a vulgar place like that, Prince?

ERIC. Where can I go? I have no one to talk with at home; and it
seems to me, for that matter, that people are equally good or bad
everywhere--although I prefer what is generally called bad company.--Do
you know John Andersson?

JACOB. [_Embarrassed_] I have never heard his name even. Who is he?

        MARCUS _and_ DAVID _go quietly out to the left_.

ERIC. A man from Småland who is full of sensible ideas.--Do you still
need to have your forehead bandaged?

JACOB. Do you think I wear the bandage as an ornament, or as a souvenir
of the city mob?

ERIC. You should not bear a grudge against the good folk because some
scamp has misbehaved himself.

JACOB. I don't, my friend, and I know perfectly well what a stranger
must expect in a hostile country. If you come to Luebeck, you will see
how they stone Swedes.

ERIC. You talk just like Jorghen Persson. Do you know him?

JACOB. I don't.

ERIC. He looks at everything in the same way as you do.

JACOB. How do you mean?

ERIC. He thinks every one is right, and that whatever happens is
_juste_. There is something sensible and enlightened in his view of
life. That's why my father hates him....

JACOB. Don't talk badly of your father. It sounds dreadful--if you will
pardon me!

ERIC. But if he acts badly, why shouldn't I say so? And I hate him, for
that matter!

JACOB. Don't say that--don't! The greatness of your royal father is so
boundless that you can't grasp it.

ERIC. It only looks that way--I know! Last night he came up to me and
put his arm around my shoulders--for the first time in my life--and I,
who have been living in the belief that I barely came up to his hip,
found to my surprise that I am as tall as he. But as soon as I looked
at him from a distance again, he grew taller and turned into a giant.

JACOB. That's what he is. And he resembles one of Buonarotti's
prophets--Isaiah, I think. And, verily, the Lord on high is with him.

ERIC. Do you really believe in God?

JACOB. Are you not ashamed of yourself?

ERIC. Well, what are you to believe in times like these, when kings and
priests persecute the faithful and profane everything that used to be
held sacred. And yet they call themselves "defenders of the faith."

JACOB. Can't we talk of something else? Please, let us!

ERIC. That's what the King always says when I go after him, and for
that reason I hate him still more--as he hates me! Do you know that it
was your father who brought my mother to him from Lauenburg?[2]

JACOB. No, I didn't know that.

ERIC. Yes, but the marriage turned out badly. They hated each other
beyond all bounds--and one day [_he rises in a state of great
agitation_] I saw him raise his stick against her--[_roaring out the
words_] against my mother--and he struck her! That day I lost my
youth[3]--and I can never forgive him--never!

JACOB. [_Leaps to his feet and put his arms about_ Eric] Look at me,
Eric! Look at me! I have a stepmother, too--who is always tormenting me
when I am at home--but hush, hush! If it can help you to hear that I am
worse off than you--very much worse--then--you know it now! Remember
that it won't last for ever, as we are growing up to freedom....

ERIC. And you don't hate her?

JACOB. Such a feeling has no place beside the new one that is now
filling my soul.

ERIC. That means--you are in love.

JACOB. That's what we may call it.... And when your own time comes,
you, too, will see your hatred change form and vanish.

ERIC. I wonder!--Perhaps you are right The lovelessness in which I was
born and brought up has turned into a flame that is consuming my soul.
My blood was poisoned at my birth, and I doubt the existence of an
antidote.... Why do you leave me?

JACOB. Because ... because we are not allowed to be friends--because we
cannot be friends.

ERIC. Do you think me so vile?

JACOB. No, no!--But I mustn't say anything more. Let us part. I shall
always watch your fate with sympathy, for I think you were born to
misfortune.

ERIC. What makes you utter what I have thought so many times?--Do you
know that I was also born to be in the way? I stand in the way of my
father's desire to see Johan on the throne. I stand in the way of his
wish to forget the hated German woman. My mind has not the true Swedish
quality, and the fault lies in my German blood. Although I am a Vasa, I
am Saxony, too, and Lauenburg, and Brunswick. I am so little of a Swede
that it gives me pleasure when the free city of Luebeck imposes a penal
tax on my country--and keeps it humiliated.

JACOB. [_Looking hard at him_] Is that the truth, or do you merely talk
like that out of politeness?

ERIC. [_Puts his hand to his sword, bid regains self-control
immediately_] Do you notice how much I love you, seeing that I
pardon such a question?--Yes, my friend, the first words taught me
by my mother were German, and in German I learned to say my evening
prayers--that old and beautiful "Heil dir, Maria, Mutter Gottes"....
Oh, that time--that time.... [_He weeps_] Oh, damn it! I am crying, I
think!--Come to the Blue Dove to-night, Jacob There you'll find Rhine
wine and merry maidens! Jorghen will be there, too. He's a man you
should know.

JACOB. [_Coldly and shrewdly_] I--shall--come.

ERIC. Thank you, friend! [_Rising_] Really, the place has a look of
pawn-shop.

JACOB. [_Sharply_] That was just what I had in mind before.

ERIC. Well, then we agree to that extent at least. Until to-night,
then! Do you know Agda?

JACOB. [_Brusquely_] No!

ERIC. [_Haughtily, giving him two fingers to shake_, JACOB _pretending
not to notice it_] Farewell!--What became of those two little
pawnbrokers?

        JACOB _does not answer_.

ERIC. [_Arrogantly_] Good-bye, then, Baruch!--Have you read the Book of
Baruch?

        _Going toward the background, he jingles the altar vessels as
        he passes them_.

    "The ring of gold, and rattling dice,
    And wine brings light to tipsy eyes.
    But in the night that light must lack,
    To wenches leads each crooked track."

That's a good one, isn't it? I made it myself!

        [_He goes out through the rear door_.

HERMAN ISRAEL. [_Enters from the right_] Are you alone?

JACOB. Yes, father.

ISRAEL. I heard somebody speaking.

JACOB. That was the Heir Apparent.

ISRAEL. What did he want?

JACOB. I don't think he has the slightest idea of what he wants.

ISRAEL. Is he your friend?

JACOB. Yes, so he calls himself, but I am not his. Because he thinks
that he is honouring me with his friendship, he flatters himself with
the belief that I return it.

ISRAEL. You are frightfully wise for a young man of your age.

JACOB. Why, it's an axiom in the art of living, that you must not be
the friend of your enemy.

ISRAEL. Can he be made useful?

JACOB. Running errands, perhaps, provided you keep him wholesomely
ignorant of the matter at stake. Otherwise I don't think I ever saw an
heir apparent more useless than this one.

ISRAEL. Do you hate him?

JACOB. No, I pity him too much for that. He is more unfortunate than
he deserves. That he will end badly, seems pretty certain. It seems
clear to himself, too, and to such an extent that he appears anxious to
hasten the catastrophe.

ISRAEL. Listen, my son. I have long noticed that I can keep no secrets
from you, and so I think it is better for me to tell you everything.
Sit down and give me your attention while I walk back and forth.... I
can think only when I am walking....

JACOB. Talk away, father. I am thinking all the time.

ISRAEL. You have probably guessed that some great event is preparing
under the surface You have probably noticed that our free city of
Luebeck is fighting for its rights here in the North. I speak of
rights, because we have the right of the pioneer who has broken new
roads--roads of trade in this case--to demand compensation and profit
from the country on which he has spent his energy. We have taught these
people to employ their natural products and to exchange them with
profit; and we have set Sweden free. Having used us, they wish now to
cast us aside. That's always the way: use--and cast aside! But there
are greater and more powerful interests than those of trade that should
compel the North to join hands with the free cities. The Emperor and
the Pope are one. Our free cities made themselves independent first
of the Emperor and then of the Pope. Now, when this country has been
helped by us and its great King to do the same, we must, willy-nilly,
remain allies against the common enemy. And until quite recently we did
stick together. Then an evil spirit seemed to take possession of this
Vasa. Whether misled by pride or fatigue, he wishes now to enter a path
that must lead us all to disaster.

JACOB. Wait a little.--All of us, you say? You had better say "us of
Luebeck," for the Swedes will gain by entering that path.

ISRAEL. Are you on their side?

JACOB. No, I am not. But I can perfectly well see where their advantage
lies. And I beg you, father, don't try to fight against Vasa, for he is
guided by the hand of the Lord! Have you not recognised that already?

ISRAEL. I wonder how I could be such a fool as to give my confidence to
one still in his nonage!

JACOB. It won't hurt you to have your plans discussed from another
point of view than your own while there is still time to correct them.
And you know, of course, that you can rely on me. Go on, now!

ISRAEL. No, I can't now.

JACOB. The pen won't write when its point has been broken. If you will
not get angry, I can tell you a little more myself.

MARCUS. [_Enters_] The one you have been waiting for is outside, sir.

JACOB. I suppose it is John Andersson.

ISRAEL. Let him wait. [_Motions_ MARCUS _out of the room; then to_
Jacob] Do you know him, too?

JACOB. I have never seen him, but now I can figure out who he is.

ISRAEL. [_Astounded_] You can figure it out, you say?

JACOB. I merely add one thing to another. Now, when the Dalecarlians
have been squelched, a new beginning will have to be made with the good
folk of Småland.

ISRAEL. Of Småland, you say?

JACOB. Yes, I understand that this John Andersson is from Småland. I
don't think his name is John Andersson, however, but--[_in a lower
voice_] Nils Dacke![4]

ISRAEL. Have you been spying?

JACOB. No, I merely listen, and look, and add together.

ISRAEL. Well, you have made a false calculation this time.

JACOB. Thus you tell me that there are two persons concerned in the
matter, and that Nils Dacke is the silent partner who will not appear
until the war has begun.

ISRAEL. I am afraid of you.

JACOB. You shouldn't be, father. I dare not do anything wrong, because
then I am always made to suffer.

ISRAEL. Do you think I am doing anything wrong?

JACOB. You are more likely than I to do so, because, like Prince Eric,
you believe in nothing.

ISRAEL. And such a thing I must hear from my own child!

JACOB. It is better than to hear it from other people's children--later
on.

MARCUS. [_Enters_] Two Dalecarlians ask to see you.

ISRAEL. Tell them to wait.

        MARCUS _goes out_.

JACOB. They'll pay for it with their heads.

ISRAEL. Who are they, then?

JACOB. Anders Persson of Rankhyttan and Mons Nilsson of Aspeboda, who
have tried in vain to get an audience with the King, and who are now
moved by their futile anger to turn to you for revenge.

ISRAEL. So you know that, too?

JACOB. Without wishing to show you any disrespect, father--how can a
man of your age believe that secrets exist?

ISRAEL. Time has run away from me. I don't know any longer where I
stand.

JACOB. Now you speak the truth! And I don't think that you estimate the
results of your venture correctly.

ISRAEL. That will appear in due time. But now you must go, for even if
you know of my venture, you must not become involved in it.

JACOB. I shall obey, but you must listen to me.

ISRAEL. No, you must listen to me! Tell Marcus that I shall expect my
visitors in the hall of state. You stay here with David and pack all
valuables into boxes ready to be sent southward.

JACOB. Father!

ISRAEL. Silence!

JACOB. One word: don't rely on me if you should do anything wrong!

ISRAEL. There is one thing _you_ may rely on; that, having power of
life and death in this house, I shall see that every traitor is tried
and executed, whether he be my own son or no. First comes my country,
then my family; but first and last--my Arty! [_He puts his hand on his
sword_] And now--go!

_Curtain_.



SECOND SCENE


        _A large room in the Blue Dove Inn. Wainscotted walls, with
        tankards and jugs ranged along the shelf above the panels.
        Benches fastened to the walls and covered with cushions and
        draperies. In the background, a corner-stand with potted
        flowers and bird-cages. Sconces containing wax candles are
        hung on the walls; candelabra stand on a table that also
        contains bowls of fruit, beakers, goblets, tumblers, dice,
        playing-cards, and a lute_.

        _It is night_. PRINCE ERIC _and_ JORGHEN PERSSON _are seated
        at the table. They are looking pale and tired, and have ceased
        drinking_.


ERIC. You want to go to sleep, Jorghen, and I prefer to dream while
still awake. To go to bed is to me like dying: to be swathed in linen
sheets and stretch out in a long bed like a coffin. And then the corpse
has the trouble of washing itself and reading its own burial service.

JORGHEN. Are you afraid of death, Prince?

ERIC. As the children are afraid of going to bed, and I am sure I'll
cry like a child when my turn comes. If I only knew what death is!

JORGHEN. Some call it a sleep, and others an awakening, but no one
knows anything with certainty.

ERIC. How could we possibly know anything of that other life, when we
know so little of this one?

JORGHEN. Yes, what is life?

ERIC. One large madhouse, it seems to me! Think of my sane and shrewd
and sensible father--doesn't he act like a madman? He rids the
country of foreigners and takes the heads of those that helped him. He
rids the country of foreigners only to drag in a lot of others, like
Peutinger and Norman,[5] whom he puts above the lords of the realm
and all other authorities. He is mad, of course!--He rids the Church
of human inventions only to demand the acceptance of new inventions
at the penalty of death. This liberator is the greatest tyrant that
ever lived, and yet this tyrant is the greatest liberator that ever
lived! This evening, you know, he wanted to prohibit me from coming
here; and when I insisted on going all the same, he threw his Hungarian
war-hammer after me, as if he had been the god Thor chasing the trolls.
He came within an inch of killing me, just as it is said--which you may
not have heard--that he killed my mother.

JORGHEN. [_Becoming attentive_] No, I never heard of that.

ERIC. That's what they say. And I can understand it. There is greatness
in it. To feel raised above all human considerations; to kill whatever
stands in the way? and trample everything else.... Sometimes, you know,
when I see him coming in his big, soft hat and his blue cloak, using
his boar-spear in place of a stick, I think he is Odin himself. When he
is angry, the people say that they can hear him from the top story down
to the cellars, and that the sound of it is like thunder. But I am not
afraid of him, and that's why he hates me. At the same time he has a
great deal of respect for me. [JORGHEN _smiles sceptically_] Yes, you
may smile! That's only because you have no respect for anything; not,
even for yourself.

JORGHEN. That least of all.

ERIC. Are you really such a beast?

JORGHEN. That's what every one thinks me, so I suppose I must believe
it.

ERIC. [_Returning to his previous idea_] And.... There is a thought
that pursues me.... He looks like old Odin, I said: Odin who has
returned to despoil the temples of the Christians just as they once
robbed his temples.... You should have seen them weighing and counting
church treasures at Herman Israel's yesterday. It was ghastly!...
And do you know, he is lucky in everything he undertakes. There is
favourable wind whenever he goes sailing; the fish bite whenever he
goes fishing; he wins whenever he gambles. They say that he was born
with a caul....

JORGHEN. A most unusual man.

ERIC. Do you know young Jacob, the son of Herman Israel? He promised to
come here to-night. Rather precocious, perhaps, but with sensible ideas
on certain subjects--and I think I admire some of his qualities because
I lack them myself.

JORGHEN. Is that so?

ERIC. Otherwise he is probably a perfect rascal like his father.

JORGHEN. Then I shall be pleased to make his acquaintance.

ERIC. Because he is a rascal?--Ha-ha!

JORGHEN. In spite of it!

AGDA. [_Enters from the left_] Did you call me, Prince?

ERIC. No, but you are always welcome. Sit down here.

AGDA. The honour is too great for me.

ERIC. Of course, it is!

AGDA. And so I leave--to save my honour.

ERIC. Dare you sting, you gnat?

AGDA. That's your fancy only. I am too sensible and humble to hurt the
feelings of a great lord like yourself, my Prince.

ERIC. Very good! Very good, indeed! Come here and talk to me a little
more.

AGDA. If your lordship commands, I must talk, of course, but....

ERIC. Give me the love that I have begged for so long!

AGDA. What one does not have one cannot give away.

ERIC. Alas!

AGDA. Not loving your lordship, I cannot give you any love.

ERIC. _Diantre_!--Give me your favour, then!

AGDA. Favours are not given away, but sold.

ERIC. Listen to that! It is as if I heard my wise Jacob himself
philosophising. [_To_ JORGHEN] Did you ever hear anything like it?

JORGHEN. All wenches learn that kind of patter from their lovers.

ERIC. Don't talk like that! This girl has won my heart.

JORGHEN. And some one else has won hers.

ERIC. How do you know?

JORGHEN. You can hear it at once, even though the proofs be not visible.

ERIC. Do you believe in love?

JORGHEN. In its existence, yes, but not in its duration.

ERIC. Do you know how a woman's love is to be won?

JORGHEN. All that's necessary is to be "the right one." If you are not,
your case is hopeless.

ERIC. That's a riddle.

JORGHEN. One of the greatest.

ERIC. Who do you think can be my rival?

JORGHEN. Some clerk, or pikeman, or rich horsemonger.

ERIC. And I who am not afraid of tossing my handkerchief to the proud
virgin-queen that rules Britannia!

JORGHEN. Yet it's true.

ERIC. Perhaps Agda is too modest--and does not dare to believe in the
sincerity of my feelings?

JORGHEN. I don't believe anything of the kind.

        _A noise is heard outside the door in the rear_.

PRINCE JOHAN [_Enters_] I hope my dear brother will pardon my intrusion
at this late hour, but I have been sent by our father out of fond
concern for my dear brother's....

ERIC. Be quick and brief, Jöns, or sit down and use a beaker as
punctuation mark! The sum of it is: the old man wants me to come home
and go to bed. Reply: the Heir Apparent decides for himself when he is
to sleep.

JOHAN. I shall not convey such a reply, especially as my dear brother's
disobedience may have serious results in this case.

ERIC. Won't you sit down and drink a goblet, Duke?

JOHAN. Thank you, Prince, but I don't wish to cause my father sorrow.

ERIC. How dreadfully serious that sounds!

JOHAN. It is serious. Our father has new and greater worries to face
because disturbances have been reported from the southern provinces,
especially from Småland.... And as it is possible that the King may
have to leave his capital, he looks to the Heir Apparent for assistance
in the administration of the government.

ERIC. Half of which is nothing but lies, of course--and then there are
such a lot of people governing already. Go in peace, my brother. I
shall come when I come.

JOHAN. My duty is done, and all I regret is being unable to gain more
of my brother's ear; of his heart I possess no part at all! [_He goes
out_.

ERIC. [_To_ JORGHEN] Can you make anything out of that boy?

JORGHEN. I can't.

ERIC. I wonder if he believes in his own preachings?

JORGHEN. That is just the worst of it. Ordinary rascals like you and
me, who don't believe in anything, can't get words of that kind over
their lips; and for that reason we can never deceive anybody.

ERIC. You _are_ a beast, Jorghen.

JORGHEN. Of course, I am.

ERIC. Is there nothing good in you at all?

JORGHEN. Not a trace! And besides--what is good? [_Pause_] My mother
was always saying that I should end on the gallows. Do you think one's
destiny is predetermined?

ERIC. That's what Master Dionysius asserts--the Calvinist who uses Holy
Writ to prove that the dispensation of grace is not at all dependent on
man.

JORGHEN. Come on with the gallows then! That's the grace dispensed to
me.

ERIC. That fellow Jacob says always that I was born to misfortune, and
that's what father says, too, when he gets angry. What do you think my
end will be?

JORGHEN. Was it not Saint Augustine who said that he who has been
coined into a groat can never become a ducat?

ERIC. That's right. But I don't think we have drunk enough to make
us start any theological disputes. Here we have been disputing for a
lifetime now, and every prophet has been fighting all the rest. Luther
has refuted Augustine, Calvin has refuted Luther, Zwingli has refuted
Calvin, and John of Leyden has refuted all of them. So we know now just
where we stand!

JORGHEN. Yes, it's nothing but humbug, and if it were not for that kind
of humbug, I should never have been born.

ERIC. What do you mean?

JORGHEN. Oh, you know perfectly well that my father was a monk who went
off and got married when they closed the monasteries. It means that
I'm a product of perjury and incest, as my father broke his oath and
established an illicit relationship like any unclean sheep.

ERIC. You _are_ a beast, Jorghen!

JORGHEN. Have I ever denied it?

ERIC. No, but there are limits....

JORGHEN. Where?

ERIC. Here and there! A certain innate sense of propriety generally
suggests the--approximate limits.

JORGHEN. Are you dreaming again, you dreamer?

ERIC. Take care! There are limits even to friendship....

JORGHEN. No, mine is limitless!

        JACOB _is shown into the room by_ AGDA, _whose hand he presses_.

ERIC. [_Rising_] There you are at last, Jacob! You have kept me waiting
a long time, and just now I was longing for you.

JACOB. Pardon me, Prince, but my thoughts were so heavy that I did not
wish to bring them into a merry gathering.

ERIC. Yes, we are devilishly merry, Jorghen and I! This is Jorghen
Persson, you see--my secretary, and a very enlightened and clever man,
but a perfect rascal otherwise, as you can judge from his horrible
looks and treacherous eyes.

JORGHEN. At your service, my dear sir!

ERIC. Sit down and philosophise with us, Jacob. Of course, I promised
you pretty maidens, but we have only one here, and she is engaged.

JACOB. [_Startled_] What do you mean by--engaged?

ERIC. That she has bestowed her heart on somebody, so that you may save
yourself the trouble of searching her bosom for it.

JACOB. Are you talking of Agda?

ERIC. Do you know Agda the Chaste, who has told us that she would sell
her favours, but never give them away?

AGDA. My God, I never, never meant anything of the kind!

JACOB. No, she cannot possibly have meant it that way.

ERIC. She has said it.

JACOB. It must be a lie.

ERIC. [_His hand on his sword-hilt_] The devil, you say!

JORGHEN. A tavern brawl of the finest water! The words have been given
almost correctly, but they were not understood as they were meant.

ERIC. Do you dare to takes sides against me, you rascal?

JORGHEN. Listen, friends....

ERIC. _With_ a hussy _against_ your master....

JACOB. She's no hussy!

AGDA. Thank you, Jacob! Please tell them everything....

ERIC. Oh, there is something to tell, then? Well, well! [_To_ JORGHEN]
And you must needs appear as the defender of innocence!

        _He makes a lunge at_ JORGHEN, _who barely manages to get out
        of the way_.

JORGHEN. Why the deuce must you always come poking after me when
somebody else has made a fool of himself? Stop it, damn you!

Eric. [_To_ JACOB] So this is my rival! Ha-ha-ha! A fellow like you!
_Ventre-saint-gris!_

        _He loses all control of himself and finally sinks on a chair,
        seized with an epileptic fit_.

JACOB. Once you honoured me with your friendship, Prince, for which I
could only give you pity in return. As I did not wish to be false, I
asked you to let me go....

ERIC. [_Leaping to his feet_] Go to the devil!

JACOB. Yes, I am going, but first you must hear what I and Agda have in
common--something you can never understand, as you understand nothing
but hatred, and for that reason never can win love....

ERIC. _Diantre!_ And I who can have the virgin-queen, the proud maiden
of Britannia, at my feet any time I care ha-ha, ha-ha!

JACOB. King David had five hundred proud maidens, but for happiness he
turned to his humble servant's only wife....

ERIC. Must I hear more of that sort of thing?

JACOB. A great deal more!

ERIC. [_Rushing at_ JACOB] Die, then!

        _The guard enters by the rear door_.

CAPTAIN OF THE GUARD [_An old, white-bearded_ man]. Your sword, if you
please, Prince Eric!

ERIC. What is this?

CAPTAIN. [_Handing_ ERIC _a document_] The King's order. You are under
arrest....

ERIC. Go to the devil, old Stenbock!

CAPTAIN. That's not a princely answer to a royal command!

ERIC. Yes, talk away!

CAPTAIN. [_Goes up to_ ERIC _and forests the sword out of his hand;
then he turns him over to the guard_] Away with him! And put him in the
tower! That's order number one! [ERIC _is led toward the door_] Then
comes number two--Mr. Secretary! [_To the guard_] Put on the handcuffs!
And then--to the Green Vault with him! To-morrow at cockcrow--ten
strokes of the rod!

JORGHEN. [_As he is seized by the guard_] Must I be spanked because
_he_ won't go to bed?

ERIC. Do you dare to lay hands on the Heir Apparent? 'Sdeath!

CAPTAIN. God is still alive, and so is the King!--March on!----

        ERIC _and_ JORGHEN _are led out by the guard_.

CAPTAIN. [_To_ AGDA] And now you'll close your drink-shop. That's the
final word. And as there is no question about it, you need not make any
answer.

        _He goes out after the guard and the prisoners_.

JACOB. Always this titanic hand that is never seen and always felt!
Now it has been thrust out of a cloud to alter our humble fates. The
liberator of the country has descended during the darkness of night to
set my little bird free.--Will you take flight with me?

AGDA. Yes, with you--and far away!

JACOB. But where?

AGDA. The world is wide!

JACOB. Come, then!

_Curtain_.


[1] A subterranean vault in the Royal Palace at Stockholm used by the
thrifty King Gustavus for the storing of gold and silver and other
valuables. Compare the warning of Nils Söderby to Mons Nilsson's wife
in the first act: "Look out for the silver--the King is coming."

[2] The first wife of Gustavus was the Princess Catherine of
Saxe-Lauenburg, whom he married in 1531, and who died in 1535. She was
of a very peculiar temperament and caused much trouble between the King
and his relatives by her reckless talk. Prince Eric was born in 1533.

[3] This is an excellent illustration of the freedom taken by
Strindberg in regard to the actual chronology of the historical facts
he is using. Eric was little more than a year old when his mother died.
Strindberg knew perfectly well what he was doing, his reason being that
the motive ascribed to Eric's hatred of his father strengthens the
dramatic quality of the play in a very high degree.

[4] A peasant chieftain, who headed the most dangerous rebellion
Gustavus had to contend with during his entire reign. The southern
province of Småland had for years been the scene of peasant
disturbances when, in 1541, Dacke took command of the scattered
flocks and merged them into an army which defied the King's troops
for nearly two years. Dacke was as able as he was ambitious. He was
in communication with the German Emperor and other foreign enemies of
Gustavus, and on one occasion the latter had actually to enter into
negotiations with the rebel. In accordance with his invariable custom,
Gustavus did not rely on hired soldiery, but turned to the people of
the other provinces, explaining and appealing to them with such success
that a sufficient army was raised and Dacke beaten and killed in 1543.

[5] In his effort to reorganise the country and its administration
on a businesslike basis, Gustavus turned first to Swedes like Olavus
Petri and Laurentius Andreæ, his first chancellor. But these were as
independent of mind as he was himself, and there was not a sufficient
number of them. Then Gustavus turned to Germany, whence a host of
adventurers as well as able, honest men swarmed into the country. The
two best known and most trusted of these foreigners were Georg Norman,
who rendered valuable services in organising the civil administration,
and Conrad von Pyhy, said to be a plain charlatan named Peutinger, who
was made Chancellor of the Realm.




ACT III


        _The King's study. The background consists almost wholly of
        large windows, some of which have panes of stained glass.
        Several of the windows are open, and through these may be seen
        trees in the first green of spring. Mast tops with flying
        flags, and church spires are visible above the tops of the
        trees_.

        _Beneath the windows are benches set in the walls. Their seats
        are covered by many-coloured cushions_.

        _At the right, a huge open fireplace, richly decorated.
        The recently adopted national coat of arms appears on the
        mantelpiece. A door on the same side leads to the waiting-room_.

        _A chair of state with canopy occupies the centre of the left
        wall. In front of it stands a long oak table covered with
        green cloth. On the table are a folio Bible, an inkstand,
        candlesticks, a war-hammer, and a number of other things. A
        door on the same side, nearer the background, leads to the
        royal apartments_.

        _The floor is covered with animal skins and rugs_.

        _The walls display paintings of Old Testament subjects. The
        most conspicuous of these represents "The Lord appearing unto
        Abraham in the plains of Mamre." The picture of Abraham bears a
        strong resemblance to the King_.

        _An Arabian water-bottle of clay and a silver cup stand on a
        small cabinet_.

        _Near the door at the right hang a long and wide blue cloak and
        a big black felt hat. A short boar-spear is leaned against the
        wall_.

        _The_ KING, _lost in thought, stands by one of the open windows
        where the full sunlight pours over him. He has on a black dress
        of Spanish cut, with yellow linings that show in the seams and
        through a number of slits. Over his shoulders is thrown a short
        cloak trimmed with sable. His hair is blond, and his tremendous
        beard, reaching almost to his waist, is still lighter in
        colour._

        _The_ QUEEN _enters from the left. She wears a yellow dress
        with black trimmings_.


KING. [_Kissing her brow_] Good morrow, my rose!

QUEEN. A splendid morning!

KING. The first spring day after a long winter.

QUEEN. Is my King in a gracious mood to-day?

KING. My graciousness is not dependent on weather or wind.--Go on now!
Is it a question of Eric?

QUEEN. It is.

KING. Well, he has my good grace once more after having slept himself
sober in the tower. And Jorghen comes next, I suppose?

QUEEN. Yes.

KING. He, on the other hand, will not have my good grace until he
reforms.

QUEEN. But....

KING. He is bad through and through, and he is spoiling Eric. Whatever
may be the cause of his badness, I cannot dispose of it, but I can
check the effects. Have you any more protégés of the same kind?

QUEEN. I won't say anything more now.

KING. Then we can talk of something else. How is my mother-in-law?

QUEEN. Oh, you know.

KING. And Johan? Where is Johan?

QUEEN. He is not far away.

KING. I wish he were still nearer--nearer to me--so near that he could
succeed me when the time comes.

QUEEN. It is not right to think like that, and still less to talk like
that, when a higher Providence has already decided in favour of Prince
Eric.

KING. Well, I can't tell whether it was vanity that fooled me into
looking for a foreign princess or wisdom that kept me away from the
homes of our Swedish nobility--one hardly ever knows what one is doing.

QUEEN. That's true.

KING. But the feet that I became the brother-in-law of the Danish
king helped the country to get peace, and so nobody has any right to
complain.

QUEEN. The country first!

KING. The country first and last. That's why Eric must be married.

QUEEN. Do you really think he has any hopes with the English queen.

KING. I don't know, but we must find out--that is, without risking the
honour of the country. It is not impossible. We have had a British
princess on the throne before.

QUEEN. Who was that?

KING. Don't you know that Queen Philippa was a daughter of King Henry
IV?[1]

QUEEN. No, I didn't know that.

KING. Then I suppose you don't know, either, that the Folkungs were
among your ancestors, and that you are also descended from King
Waldemar, the Conqueror of Denmark?[2]

QUEEN. No, no! I thought the bloody tale of the Folkungs was ended long
ago.

KING. Let us hope it is! But your maternal ancestor was nevertheless
a daughter of Eric Ploughpenny of Denmark and had a son with her
brother-in-law, King Waldemar of Sweden, the son of Earl Birger....

QUEEN. Why do you tell me all these dreadful stories?

KING. I thought it might amuse you to know that you have royal blood in
your veins, while I have peasant blood. You are too modest, Margaret,
and I wish to see you exalted--so high that that fool Eric will be
forced to respect you.

QUEEN. To have sprung from a crime should make one more modest.

KING. Well, that's enough about that. Was there anything else?

        _The_ QUEEN _hesitates_.

KING. You are thinking of Anders Persson and Mons Nilsson, but I won't
let you talk of them.

        _The_ QUEEN _kneels before him_.

KING. Please, get up! [_As she remains on her knees_] Then I must leave
you. [_He goes out to the left_.

        PRINCE ERIC _enters from the right; he is pale and unkempt, and
        his face retains evidence of the night's carouse_.

        _The_ QUEEN _rises, frightened_.

ERIC. Did I scare you?

QUEEN. Not exactly.

ERIC. I can take myself out of the way. I was only looking for a glass
of water.

        _He goes to the water-bottle, fills a cup full of water and
        gulps it down; then another, and still another_.

QUEEN. Are you sick?

ERIC. [_Impertinently_] Only a little leaky.

QUEEN. What do you mean?

ERIC. Well, dry, if you please. The more wine you drink, the dryer gets
your throat. The wetter, the dryer--that's madness, like everything
else.

QUEEN. Why do you hate me?

ERIC. [_Cynically_] Because I am not allowed to love you. [_In the
meantime he continues to pour down one glass of water after the other_]
You must not be in love with your step-mother and yet you must love
her: that's madness, too.

QUEEN. Why do you call me stepmother?

ERIC. Because that's the word, and that's what you are. Is that clear?
If it is, then that isn't madness at least.

QUEEN. You have the tongue of a viper.

ERIC. And the reason, too.

QUEEN, But no heart!

ERIC. What could I do with it? Throw it at the feet of the women to be
defiled by them?--My heart lies buried in my mother's coffin in the
vault of the Upsala cathedral. I was only four years old when it was
put there, but there it lies with her, and they tell me there was a
hole in her head as if she had been struck by the hammer of Thor--which
I did not see, however. When I asked to see my mother for the last
time at the burial, they had already screwed on the coffin lid. Well,
there lies my heart--the only one I ever had What have you to do with
my entrails, for that matter? Or with my feelings?--Look out for my
reason; that's all! I grasp your thoughts before you have squeezed
them out of yourself. I understand perfectly that you would like to
see the crown placed on the red hair of that red devil whom you call
son, and whom I must needs call brother. He insists that he has more
ancestors than I, and that he is descended from Danish kings. If that's
so, he has a lot of fine relatives. Eric Ploughpenny had his head cut
off. Abel killed his brother and was killed in turn. Christoffer was
poisoned. Eric the Blinking was stuck like a pig.--I have no elegant
relatives like those, but if heredity counts, I must keep an eye on my
dear brother.

QUEEN. Nobody can talk of anything but blood and poison to-day. The sun
must have risen on the wrong side this fine morning!

ERIC. The sun is a deceiver; don't trust it. Blood will be shed in this
place before nightfall. Eric and Abel were the names of those elegant
relatives; not Cain and Abel! And that time it was Abel who killed
Cain--no, Eric, I mean! That's a fine omen to start with! Eric was
killed! Poor Eric!

QUEEN. Alas, alas!

ERIC. But it is of no use to take any stock in superstition, as I
entered this vale of misery with my fist full of blood.

QUEEN. Now you do scare me!

ERIC. [_Laughing_] That's more than Jorghen would believe--that I
could scare anybody.

QUEEN. What blood is to be shed here to-day?

ERIC. I am not sure, but it is said that those Dalecarlians will have
their heads cut off.

QUEEN. Can it not be prevented?

ERIC. If it is to be, it cannot be prevented, but must come as thunder
must come after lightning. And besides, what does it matter? Heads are
dropping off here like ripe apples.

        _The_ KING _enters reading a document. The_ QUEEN _meets him
        with a supplicating look_.

KING. [_Hotly_] If you have any faith in me at all, Margaret, cease
your efforts to judge in matters of state. I have been investigating
for two years without being able to make up my mind. How can you, then,
hope to grasp this matter?--Go in to the children now. I have a word
to say to Eric!

        _The_ QUEEN _goes out_.

KING. If you could see yourself as you are now, Eric, you would despise
yourself!

ERIC. So I do anyhow!

KING. Nothing but talk! If you did despise yourself, you would change
your ways.

ERIC. I cannot make myself over.

KING. Have you ever tried?

ERIC. I have.

KING. Then your bad company must counteract your good intentions.

ERIC. Jorghen is no worse than anybody else, but he has the merit of
knowing himself no better than the rest.

KING. Do you bear in mind that you are to be king some time?

ERIC. Once I am king, the old slips will be forgotten.

KING. There you are mistaken again. I am still paying for old slips.
However, if you are not willing to obey me as a son, you must obey me
as a subordinate.

ERIC. The Heir Apparent is no subject!

KING. That's why I used the word "subordinate." And all are subordinate
to the King.

ERIC. Must I obey blindly?

KING. As long as you are blind, you must obey blindly. When you get
your sight, you will obey with open eyes. But obey you must!--Wait only
till you have begun to command, and you will soon see how much more
difficult that is, and how much more burdensome.

ERIC. [_Pertly_] Pooh!

KING. [_Angrily_] Idiot!--Go and wash the dirt off yourself, and see
that your hair is combed. And rinse that filthy mouth of yours first of
all, so that you don't stink up my rooms. Go now--or I'll give you a
week in the tower to sober up. And if that should not be enough, I'll
take off your ears, so that you can never wear a crown. Are those words
plain enough?

ERIC. The law of succession....

KING. I make laws of that kind to suit myself! Do you understand
now?--That's all!--Away!

        PRINCE ERIC _goes out_.

COURTIER. [_Enters from the right_] Herman Israel, Councillor of
Luebeck!

KING. Let him come.

        _The_ COURTIER _goes out_. HERMAN ISRAEL _enters shortly
        afterward_.

KING. [_Meets him and shakes his hand; then he puts his arm about his
neck and leads him across the floor in that manner]_ Good day, my dear
old friend, and welcome! Sit down, sit down! [_He seats himself on the
chair of state, and_ ISRAEL _sits down across the table_] So you have
just come from Dalecarlia?

ISRAEL. That's where I was lately.

KING. I was there, too, as you know, to straighten out the mess left
after the False Sture and the fight about the bells, but you stayed on
when I left.--Did you keep an eye on Master Olavus Petri? What sort of
a man has he turned out? Can I trust him?

ISRAEL. Absolutely! He is not only the most faithful, but the cleverest
negotiator I have seen.

KING. Really, Herman? I am glad to hear that. Do you really think so,
Herman? Well, you know the old affair between him and me, and how that
was settled. But it _was_ settled!--So much for that. Let us talk of
our affairs now.

ISRAEL. As you say. But let us keep our words as well as actions under
control.

KING. [_Playing with the war-hammer_] All right! Control yours as much
as you please.

ISRAEL. [_Pointing at the hammer_] For the sake of old friendship and
good faith, can't we put that away?

KING. Ha-ha! With pleasure, if you are afraid of it, Herman!--Go on
now! But cut it short!

ISRAEL. Then I'll start at the end. The country's debt to Luebeck has
been paid, and we are about to part.

KING. That sounds like writing! However, we shall part as friends.

ISRAEL. As allies rather....

KING. So _that's_ what you are aiming at, Israel?--No, I have had
enough of dependence.

ISRAEL. Listen, your Highness, or Majesty, or whatever I am to call
you....

KING. Call me Gustav, as you used to do when I called you father.

ISRAEL. Well, my son, there are many things that drive us apart--many,
indeed--but there is one thing that keeps us together: our common,
legitimate opposition to the Emperor....

KING. Right you are! And that's the reason why we can rely on each
other without any written treaties.

ISRAEL. You forget one thing, my son: that I am a merchant....

KING. And I the customer. Have you been paid?

ISRAEL. Paid? Yes.... But there are things that cannot be paid in
money....

KING. It is for me to speak of the gratitude I owe you and the free
city of Luebeck ever since the day I first came to you--a young man
who thought himself deserted by God, and who knew himself deserted
by all humanity. Be satisfied to find my gratitude expressed in the
friendly feelings I harbour and show toward you. A debt like that
cannot be paid in money, and still less in treaties.--Why do you want
any treaties? In order to tie me and the country for a future of
uncertain duration?--Don't force me to become ungrateful, Herman! On my
soul, I have enough as it is to burden me--far too much!

ISRAEL. What is weighing on you, my son?

KING. This.... Oh, will you believe me, Herman, old friend, that
lawyer form a decision or pass a judgment without having turned to the
Eternal and Almighty Lord for advice? When, after fasting, prayer, and
meditation, I have got the answer from above that I was asking for,
then I strike gladly, even if it be my own heart-roots that must be cut
off. But you remember Master John.... John, the old friend of my youth,
who assisted me in that first bout with Christian? He changed heart and
incited the Dalecarlians to rise against me. His head had to fall, and
it did fall! [_Rising_] Since that day my peace is gone. My nearest and
dearest don't look at me in the same way they used to do. My own wife,
my beloved Margaret.... She turns away from me when I want to kiss her
pure brow, and can you imagine? Yesterday, at the dinner-table, she
kept looking at my hand as if she had seen blood on it!--I don't regret
what I did. I have no right to regret it. I was right--by God, I was
right! But nevertheless--my peace is gone!

ISRAEL. [_Pensively_] Those feelings are an honour to your heart, my
son, and I must admit that I didn't think you quite as sensitive....

KING. Never mind! It was not meant as a boast. But now I find myself in
the same situation again. Tell me, Herman, what you think of Anders
Persson and Mons Nilsson.

ISRAEL. [_Disturbed_] Will my opinion have any influence on their fate,
or have you already made up your mind?

KING. I am still in doubts, as you ought to know.

ISRAEL. Then I must ask permission to remain silent.

KING. Are you my friend?

ISRAEL. Yes, up to a certain point. But you must not trust me too far,
as I am not my own master and have no right to give away what is not
mine.

KING. Fie on such astuteness!

ISRAEL. You should get some of it yourself!

KING. I'll try.--First of all you must give me a final receipt for the
country's paid-up debt.

ISRAEL. I don't carry such documents with me, and the receipt has to be
signed by the Council in regular session.

KING. [_Smiting the table with the hammer_] Herman!

ISRAEL. Please put that thing away!

KING. I can see that you wish to lead me where I don't want to go. You
have some purpose in mind that I can't make out. Speak out, old man, or
you'll have me in a rage! You want to coax me into signing some kind of
paper. What is it?

ISRAEL. Nothing but a treaty providing for mutual friendship and mutual
trade. That's all!

KING. And that I will never sign! I know all about Luebeck's friendship
as well as its trade. Talk of something else!

ISRAEL. I have nothing else to talk of. Why don't you believe me?

KING. Because you lie!

ISRAEL. Because you are unfortunate enough to think that I lie, you
will never know the truth.

KING. Yes, unfortunate, indeed--as unfortunate as a man can be, for I
have not a single friend.

ISRAEL. It hurts me to hear you talk like that, Gustav, and--and it
makes me sad to see that your greatness and your exalted office have
brought you so little true happiness. I shall say nothing more about
gratitude, because the idea of it is too vague in human minds, but I
have loved you like a son ever since that hour when the Lord of Hosts
put your fate in my hands. I have followed your brilliant course as
if it had been my own. I have joyed over your successes, and I have
sorrowed over your sorrows.... Frequently my duties toward my own
people have kept me from lending you a helping hand. Frequently, too,
your own hardness has stood between us. But now, when I behold you so
deeply crushed, and when you have treated me with a confidence that
I may well call filial, I shall forget for a moment that I am your
enemy--which I must be as a man of Luebeck, while as Herman Israel I am
your friend. I shall forget that I am a merchant, and--[_Pause_] I hope
that I may never regret it--[_Pause_] and--and.... Do you know John
Andersson?

KING. I don't.

ISRAEL. But I do, and I know Anders Persson and Mons Nilsson, too! They
called on me yesterday, and--to-morrow the southern provinces will rise
in rebellion!

KING. So _that's_ what was coming? Oh! Who is John Andersson?

ISRAEL. Hard to tell. But back of his face appears another one that
looks like the devil's own. Have you heard the name of Dacke?

KING. Yes, but only in a sort of dream. Dacke?--Dacke?--It sounds like
the cawing of a jackdaw.--Who is he?

ISRAEL. Nobody knows. It is the name of one invisible, whom all know
and none have seen. But that name has been seen on a letter signed
by--the Emperor.

KING. The Emperor?

ISRAEL. The Emperor of the Holy Roman and German Empire!

KING. Fairy-tales!

ISRAEL. You won't believe me? Investigate!

KING. I believe you and I thank you!--You say that Anders Persson and
Mons Nilsson have been plotting with the rebels right here in my own
city?

ISRAEL. As surely as I have ears to hear with.

KING. My God! My God!--Then I know what to do with them! Two years of
struggle with myself and my conscience, and at last I know what to do
with them! At last!

COURTIER. [_Bringing in_ JACOB ISRAEL] Jacob Israel of Luebeck!

KING. Who dares to disturb me?

JACOB. [_Throwing himself at the_ KING'S _feet without noticing his
father_] My noble King, an humble youth has ventured to disturb you
because your life is at stake!

KING. Speak up! What more? Who are you?

JACOB. I am Jacob Israel, your Highness.

KING, [_to_ ISRAEL] It's your Jacob, is it not?

        JACOB _is thunderstruck at the sight of his father_.

ISRAEL. It's my boy.

KING. What do you want? Speak quickly, or away with you!

        JACOB _does not answer_.

KING. Who is after my life? If you mean John Andersson or Dacke, I know
it already.--For the sake of your good intention and your youth, but
particularly for the sake of your father, I shall forgive you.

ISRAEL. But I have no right to forgive so quickly.--You came here to
accuse your father? Answer me yes or no.

JACOB. Yes!

ISRAEL. Go then, and take my curse with you!

JACOB. [_Kneeling before_ ISRAEL] Forgive, father!

ISRAEL. No more your father! You silly, impudent youth, who think that
you understand the art of statesmanship and the laws of honour better
than he who brought you into the world! What you did not foresee was
that I might change my mind.

KING. Oh, forgive him, Herman!

ISRAEL. I have forgiven him already, but our sacred laws will never
do so. Take this ring, Jacob, and go to--you know whom!--But bid me
good-bye first.

JACOB. [_Throwing himself into the arms of his father_] Take away your
curse, father!

        ISRAEL _wets one of his fingers, makes a sign with it on his
        son's forehead, and mutters a few inaudible words. Then he
        kisses_ JACOB _on both cheeks and leads him to the door at the
        right, through which the young man disappears_.

KING. What are you two doing?

ISRAEL. [_Deeply stirred_] That is a family secret. Now we can go on.

KING. Or quit. You have given me proof of your unswerving friendship,
Herman, and I thank you for the last time. Give me your hand!

ISRAEL. Not to promise anything that cannot be kept!

KING. No promises, then! Farewell, and peace be with you!

ISRAEL. [_Moved_] I thank you!

KING. What is that? You are crying?

ISRAEL. Perhaps, for now I am your equal in misfortune. I have lost my
son!

KING. He'll come back to you.

ISRAEL. [_As he is leaving_] Never!--Good-bye!

KING. [_Escorting him to the door_] Good-bye, Herman, old friend!

        HERMAN ISRAEL _goes out_.

        _The_ KING'S MOTHER-IN-LAW _enters from the left in the white
        dress of a Cistercian nun_.

KING. [_Greeting her kindly_] Good morning, mother-in-law.

MOTHER-IN-LAW. Are you busy?

KING. Very much so.

MOTHER-IN-LAW. But not so much that you cannot hear the justified
complaint of a subject.

KING. You are too modest. However, let me decide whether your complaint
be justified or no. I must hear too many unjustified ones, God wot!

MOTHER-IN-LAW. If I condescend to make a complaint, you may be sure
that I have reasons for it.

KING. But they must be good. Most reasons are no good at all.--Is it a
question of Anders Persson and Mons Nilsson?

MOTHER-IN-LAW. No, of myself.

KING. Then you should be well informed at least.

MOTHER-IN-LAW. Is there law and justice in this country?

KING. Both law and justice, but also a lot of wrong-doing.

MOTHER-IN-LAW. Do you know that the Queen's mother--that is, I--has
been insulted by the mob?

KING. No, I didn't know, but I have long expected it, as I have told
you before this.

MOTHER-IN-LAW. You think it right, then?...

KING. No, I think it wrong of you to wear that dress in public, when
it is forbidden. And it is only out of respect for yourself and
your--hm!--sex, that I have not long ago ordered you to be stripped of
it.

MOTHER-IN-LAW. Ha-ha!

KING. And it has been wrong of me to leave the Convent of Vreta
standing for you to live in, when the law demands that it be tom down.

MOTHER-IN-LAW. Ha-ha!

KING. Since you, by persuading me into letting the convent remain, have
placed me before the public in the awkward position of a perverter
of justice, you should, at least, show me the consideration of not
appearing on the streets in that dress. And as I have given you
permission to come here _at your own risk_, you must bear that risk
yourself. To show you that justice exists, however, I shall see that
those who insulted you be found--they had no right to insult you, even
if you had been the humblest woman of the people. Now that matter is
settled! [_He goes to the door at the right and summons the_ COURTIER,
_who appears in the doorway_] Call four of the guards. Put two at
that door [_indicating the door at the left_] and two at the other
[_indicating the right-hand door_.

MOTHER-IN-LAW. Thus I am treated like a thief and a murderer by my own
kinsman....

KING. No, you are not! But no one knows what may happen.... It depends
on your own conduct.

MOTHER-IN-LAW. [_With a threat in her glance_] Do you call that freedom?

KING. It is freedom for me--to be free from unreasonable people.

        _Two guards enter from the right_.

KING. [_Pointing at the left-hand door_] Outside that door. And no
one can get in here; literally no one! [_As the guards hesitate_]
If anybody should come, whoever it be--whoever it be, mind you--and
try to force his way in here, cut him down--cut him down! [_To his_
MOTHER-IN-LAW] I cannot show you the door, but I must warn you that two
executions will take place in this room within a few minutes.

MOTHER-IN-LAW. Here?

KING. Yes, here! Do you wish to look on?

MOTHER-IN-LAW. [_Approaching the door at the left_] I shall go in a
moment, but first you must hear something for your own benefit....

KING. If it is for _my_ benefit, I can guess the nature of it. Well,
spit it out now!

MOTHER-IN-LAW. This man Herman Israel, whom you regard as a friend, is
speaking ill of you on your back.

KING. When I do what's ill, he has the right to speak ill of me--has he
not?

MOTHER-EN-LAW. [_Going out in a huff_] Oh, it's impossible to reason
with you!

KING. Have you really discovered that at last?--At last! [_He goes to
the door at the right_] Let Master Olavus Petri come in.

        MASTER OLAVUS _enters_.

KING. Good day, Olof. I have read your report on the conditions at
Copperberg, and I am pleased with you.--Have Anders Persson and Mons
Nilsson been arrested?

OLAVUS. They have been locked up since last night.

KING. [_Goes to the door at the right_] Order Anders Persson and Mons
Nilsson to be brought up here at once. [_To_ OLAVUS] Have you any proof
that the prisoners have been plotting with John Andersson?

OLAVUS. Proof and witnesses.

KING. Good!--Tell me something What do you think of Herman Israel--as a
man, and more particularly in his relationship to me?

OLAVUS. He seems to me a good and faithful friend of your Highness.
As a private person he is honest in every respect, big-minded, and
straight in all his actions.

KING. I am glad to hear it just now, when I have all but lost my faith
in friendship. So you think I can rely on him?

OLAVUS. Absolutely.

KING. Have you heard of the restlessness in the southern provinces?

OLAVUS. Yes, I am sorry to say.

KING. They say that it is pretty serious.

OLAVUS. So serious that nothing but quick and determined action can
save the country.

KING. Have you heard the Emperor's name mentioned in this connection?

OLAVUS. I have.

KING. I want a piece of advice, although I may not take it. What would
you, in my place, do with Anders Persson and Mons Nilsson?

OLAVUS. Have them executed before the sun has set.

KING. You are a stem man, Olof!

OLAVUS. Yes, why not?

KING. Do you think you could sleep nights--having shown that kind
of--sternness?

OLAVUS. Only then should I be able to sleep in peace....

KING. Very well!--Have you anything to ask me about?

OLAVUS. I have--but it's a delicate question.

KING. Let's see!

OLAVUS. It concerns the mother of the Queen....

KING. The people are muttering?

OLAVUS. The people think that when the King has ordered the
introduction of a new faith, he should not for family reasons overlook
the violation of the established law....

KING. It's not the people, but you, who are saying that....

OLAVUS. Suppose I took the liberty of telling my King the truth....

KING. You're no court fool who needs to run about dropping truths
wherever you go! [_Pause_] Now, I am willing to admit that the
indiscretion of my gracious mother-in-law puts me in a false position
toward the adherents of the new faith.... But this is not the
bedchamber, and we'll let that question stay where it belongs; back of
the bed curtains. Is there anything else?

OLAVUS. Nothing else. But this question....

KING. [_Hotly_] I'll solve myself!

OLAVUS. Can your Highness solve it?

KING. I think you ask too many questions!

OLAVUS. If it were a private matter, yes--but as it concerns the whole
country....

KING. Which I am looking after! I am looking after the whole country.
And if you must know, I have just settled that very question, so that
your advice is a little belated. The Convent of Vreta will be closed
before you have time to write another sermon. Do you realise now that I
have a right to be angry with your needless and unsolicited questions?

OLAVUS. I stand corrected!

KING. I have got you on account of my sins, and I suppose I must take
your faults with your merits, which are great. Now we are done with
_that I_ Go back and roar in your pulpit now. Here I do the roaring!

        MASTER OLAVUS _goes out by the door at the right_.

KING. [_Standing in front of that door with folded hands and speaking
in a barely audible voice_] Eternal Lord, who rules the destinies of
princes and of peoples, illumine my mind and strengthen my will, so
that I may not judge unrighteously! [_He makes the sign of the cross
and mutters a brief prayer; then he opens the door_] Bring in the
prisoners!

        _The door remains open while the_ KING _seats himself in the
        chair of state_.

        ANDERS PERSSON _and_ MONS NILSSON _are brought in_. _They look
        around the room uneasily at first; then they start toward the_
        KING.

KING. Stay where you are! [_Pause_] Once I called you my friends,
Anders Persson and Mons Nilsson. You know why. But that was long ago.
I let you keep life and goods when you had forfeited both, and thus
Providence rid me mercifully of the debt of gratitude I had come to owe
you. Two years ago you withdrew your oath of loyalty and opened war on
me for the sake of those bells. Being victorious, I had a right to your
heads, but I let you go. That's how my debt was paid. Your ingratitude
wiped out my gratitude, and so _that_ bill was settled. Now the time
has come for a new settlement, and this time the balance is against
you. To find out just where you stood, I invited you to my capital, and
you might have guessed that I would keep my eyes on you. My ears have
been open, too, and I have learned that you have begun plotting all
over again. Do you know John Andersson?

ANDERS _and_ MONS. No!

KING. [_Rising and approaching them angrily_] Do you know Dacke?

ANDERS _and_ MONS. [_Falling on their knees_] Mercy!

KING. Yes, mercy! But there will be no more mercy. You have had it
once, and twice is too much.

        ANDERS _and_ MONS _make movements to speak_.

KING. Silence! I am doing the speaking now! You were going to talk
about friendship, of course. I cannot be the friend of my enemies,
and having cancelled your acquaintance, I don't even know you. Were
I to let old devotion influence my judgment, I should not be acting
as an unbiassed judge. And he who has incurred the disfavour of the
law cannot be helped by any favour of mine! That's enough words spent
on this matter! [_Goes to the door at the right_] Take away these
culprits, guard!

ANDERS. What is the sentence?

KING. That you lose life, honour, and property.

        MONS _makes a gesture as if wishing to shake hands with the_
        KING.

KING. _My_ hand? Oh, no! Shake hands with the heads-man, and kiss the
block--that's good enough for you!

ANDERS. One word!

KING. Not one!

        ANDERS PERSSON _and_ MONS NILSSON _are led out_.

        _The_ KING _turns his back on them and goes to the chair of
        state, where he sinks down, burying his face in his hands_.

_Curtain_.


[1] Philippa of England, who died in 1430, was the queen of Eric of
Pomerania, who succeeded the great Queen Margaret on the united thrones
of the three Scandinavian kingdoms. She was as sweet and fine as he was
stupid and worthless, and to this day her memory survives among the
people.

[2] The Folkungs were the descendants of the puissant Earl Birger of
Håtuna, who, as an uncrowned king, ruled Sweden in very much the same
spirit as King Gustavus himself. The Folkung dynasty reigned from 1250
to 1389--and spent much of that time in fighting among themselves. King
Waldemar II gained the name of "Conqueror" by adding Esthonia and other
Baltic districts to Denmark.




ACT IV



FIRST SCENE


        _A square at the foot of Brunkeberg, A fountain stands in the
        centre. The Hansa House appears at the right. It is built of
        red bricks, with windows in Gothic style. The windows are
        barred outside and have shutters within. The gates are fastened
        with heavy wooden beams. Above the gateway appear the flag and
        coat of arms of Luebeck._

        _At the left is a tavern with a sign-board bearing the
        inscription: "The Golden Apple." There are trees in front of
        it, and under these tables and benches. Next the foreground is
        a bower with a table and benches within it_.

        _The hillside of Brunkeberg forms the background. It contains a
        number of gallows, wheels, and similar paraphernalia._

        _There is a bench in front of the Hanseatic office_.

        AGDA _and_ KARIN _are standing at the fountain when the curtain
        rises_. AGDA _carries a water-jar, while_ KARIN _has a basket
        full of flowers and wreaths_.


AGDA. You ask what that big red house is? It used to be the Convent of
St. Clara. Now it is the Hanseatic office.

KAREN. Do they ever buy any flowers there?

AGDA. Not now, I think. I used to bring flowers there when an image of
the Virgin Mary stood at the corner.--I wish she were there still!

KARIN. What do they do in that house? They tell so many queer stories
about it, and no one is ever admitted....

AGDA. Have you heard that, too? I suppose they buy and sell, like all
that come from Luebeck.

KARIN. Of course, but they say that people have disappeared in that
house and that those who live there are heathens who sacrifice....

AGDA. You have heard that, too? But it can't be true! Do you think so?

KARIN. How could I tell? And why are you so disturbed by those stories?
[AGDA _does not reply_] Gossip says that you used to have a friend in
there. Is it true?

AGDA. Well, as you have heard about it But whether he still be there
Oh, if I only knew!

KARIN. I'll ring and ask.

AGDA. No, no! You don't know what kind of people they are!

KARIN. Do you think they'll eat me? [_She goes up to the gateway and
putts a string; a bell is heard ringing inside_] Listen! That's the old
vesper bell! I know it! Bing-bong! Bing-bong!

AGDA. Stop it! Somebody might come.

KARIN. Isn't that what we want? But no one does come, my dear.--It's
a gruesome place. And I shall leave it alone now.--Do you know Prince
Eric, Agda?

AGDA. Yes, it was on his account they closed up the Blue Dove. Now I am
working over there, at the Golden Apple.

KARIN. They say that he used to be very polite to you.

AGDA. No, he was most impolite, not to say nasty.

KARIN. He had been drinking then. Otherwise he is merely miserable,
they say.

AGDA. Do you know him?

KARIN. No, I have only seen him, but I cannot forget his sad eyes and
his long face. He looks so much like a doll I had once--I called it
Blinkie Bloodless.... I suppose they are not kind to him at home,
either.

AGDA. Probably not, but a man has no right to act like a brute because
he is unhappy.

KARIN. Why do you talk like that? He drinks a lot of wine, like most
young men and Hush! Somebody is coming....

AGDA. Good-bye, Karin. I have to run....

        [_She hurries into the tavern at the left_.

KARIN. [_As she goes to the right_] I'll be back.

        PRINCE ERIC _and_ JORGHEN PERSSON _enter from the rear_.

ERIC. Here's my new well-spring of wine. Come quick to the bower here.

JORGHEN. And Agda is here, too!

ERIC. Well, what of it? [_Rapping on the table_.

        AGDA _appears_.

ERIC. [_To_ AGDA] Bring us some Rhine wine and then make yourself
invisible. [_To_ JORGHEN] You know, Jorghen, I am facing a crucial
moment and must be ready to act at once. The King has lost his reason
and is committing acts that cannot be defended! Yesterday he cut off
the heads of those Dalecarlians. To-day comes the news that his troops
have been beaten by the peasants of Småland, who are now crossing
Holaved Forest.[1] Now the Dalecarlians will rise, of course, and
everything is lost.

JORGHEN. What does that concern us? Let the world perish, and I shall
laugh at it.

ERIC. But this is what beats everything else for madness. Finding his
treasury empty, the King, in his incredible simplicity, tries to borrow
money from these Luebeckians, who are his enemies.

JORGHEN. Well, if you need money, your enemies are the best ones to
take it from.

ERIC. If I am not crazy already, you'll make me so! Please be serious a
moment!

JORGHEN. [_Recites_]

    "The ring of gold, and rattling dice,
    And wine brings light to tipsy eyes.
    But in the night, that light must lack,
    To wenches leads each crooked track."

        _At that moment_ AGDA _appears with the wine_.

ERIC. [_Laughing idiotically at_ JORGHEN'S _recitation_] Ha-ha! That's
a good one. But then, I made it myself.--Well, Agda, or Magda, or what
it is, where's your pawnbroker to-day?

        AGDA _does not reply_.

ERIC. Do you know that those Hanseatic people are in the habit of
butchering little boys and selling them to the Turk?

        AGDA. Is that true?

ERIC. There is some truth in it, I think.

JORGHEN. Let the maiden go before she begins to cry. I can't bear tears.

ERIC. I suppose you have never cried, Jorghen?

JORGHEN. Twice: when I was born, and once after that--out of rage.

ERIC. You are a beast, Jorghen.

        AGDA _goes back into the tavern_.

JORGHEN. However--you wish to figure out what is to happen, and to
form a decision on the basis of your false calculations. Have you not
noticed how all our plans are foiled? That's the game of the gods.
Sometimes we act wisely, and everything goes to the devil, and then
we act like fools, and everything turns out right. It's nothing but
humbug--all of it!

ERIC. I think so, too, and yet there must be some sort of sense in it.

JORGHEN. Not as far as I can see. It's just like dicing.

ERIC. Let the dice rattle, then!

JORGHEN. Let them rattle! That's the right word for it. Now it's a
question of head or tail, however--whether the King is to be the tail,
and the man from Småland the head.... Look, who comes here!

        KARIN _enters from the right_.

ERIC. [_Staring at her_] Who--is--that?

JORGHEN. A flower girl.

ERIC. No--this is--something else! Do you see?

JORGHEN. What?

ERIC. What I see--but, of course, you can't.

        KARIN _comes forward, kneels before_ ERIC _and offers him a
        wreath_.

ERIC. [_Rises, takes the wreath and places it on the head of_ KAREN;
_then to_ JORGHEN] Look! Now the wreath has been added to the crown.[2]

JORGHEN. What crown?

ERIC. Didn't you see? [_To_ KARIN] Get up, child! You should not be
kneeling to me, but I to you. I don't want to ask your name, for I
know who you are, although I have never seen you or heard of you
before.--What do you ask of me? Speak!

KAREN. [_Unaffectedly_] That your Grace buy my flowers.

ERIC. Put your flowers there. [_He takes a ring from one cf his fingers
and gives it to her_] There!

KARIN. No, I cannot wear that ring, your Grace--it's much too grand for
me. And if I try to sell it, I shall be seized as a thief.

ERIC. You are as wise as you are beautiful.

        [_He gives her money_.

KARIN. I thank your Grace, but it is too much.

ERIC. As you named no price, I can do so myself.

        KARIN _goes out. A long pause follows_.

ERIC. Did you see?

JORGHEN. Not a thing.

ERIC. Didn't you hear, either? Didn't you notice her voice?

JORGHEN. A voice like that of any jade--rather pert.

ERIC. Stop your tongue, Jorghen! I love her!

JORGHEN. She is not the first.

ERIC. Yes, the first, and the only one!

JORGHEN. Well, seduce her if you must.

ERIC. [_Drawing his sword_] Take care, or by God!...

JORGHEN. Have we now got to the poking point again?

ERIC. I don't know what has happened, but this moment has made me
despise you. The same city can't hold you and me. Your eyes defile me,
and your whole being stinks. I shall leave you, and I don't want to
see you face to face again.--It is as if an angel had come to take me
away from the habitations of the damned. I despise my whole past, as I
despise you and myself.

        [_He goes out in the same direction as_ KARIN _went before_.

JORGHEN. Seems to be serious this time. But I guess you'll come back.
[_He raps on the table_.

        AGDA _appears_.

JORGHEN. Do you know Karin, the flower girl?

AGDA. Yes, I do.

JORGHEN. What kind of a piece is she?

AGDA. A nice and decent girl, of whom I have never heard anything bad.

JORGHEN. Can you see anything beautiful about her?

AGDA. No, but she is rather pretty, and there is like a halo of
sweetness about her.

JORGHEN. Oh, it was that he saw, then!

AGDA. Tell me, secretary, are you really as hard as people say?

JORGHEN. I am not hard to anybody, child, but the world has been hard
to me ever since I was born.

AGDA. Why don't you always speak like that?

JORGHEN However, the Prince is enamoured, bewitched.

AGDA. Poor fellow!--Tell me, secretary, is the Prince quite right?

JORGHEN. You and your questions are very amusing. Let me ask you one
now. Hm! Do you think a woman could possibly--hm!--love me?

AGDA. No, I don't. [JORGHEN _looks offended_] Not unless you try to be
good.

JORGHEN. How the devil is that to be done?

AGDA. Shame! Shame!

JORGHEN. If you never see anything good, how can you believe in it?

AGDA. Tell me, secretary, did the Prince mean what he said about the
Hanseatic people and what they are doing in that house?

JORGHEN. No, child! That was only a cruel jest. But no Swedish
authority can interfere with what they are doing in there. That much
you should know, if you are worrying about your Jacob.

AGDA. Will you do me a favour? It won't cost you anything.

JORGHEN. With the greatest pleasure, my dear girl.

AGDA. Find Jacob for me! He had promised to meet me, and he never came.
We have been ringing the bell at the door, but no one answers.

JORGHEN. I don't want to hurt you, Agda, but unfortunately I have
reason to believe that all the Luebeck people have gone away on account
of the new rebellion.

AGDA. And he won't come back, you think?

JORGHEN. I don't like to prophesy, because it generally turns out the
other way, but I don't think he will be back soon.

AGDA. [_Sinking to the ground_] Lord Jesus!

JORGHEN. [_Rises and helps her to her feet_] What is it, girl?--Tell
me! [_in a lower voice_] A child?

AGDA. He had given me his promise.

JORGHEN. [_Genuinely moved_] Poor woman!

        AGDA _watches him closely_.

JORGHEN. Misery, always misery, wherever love gets in its work!

AGDA. And you don't despise me?

JORGHEN. I pity you, as I pity all of us.

AGDA. Can you see now that good exists?

JORGHEN. Where?

AGDA. Within yourself.

JORGHEN. Pooh!--Is there anything else I can do for you?

AGDA. Yes, secretary, if you would write to Luebeck and ask Jacob....

JORGHEN. I have not much use for love-affairs, but I'll write,
nevertheless, provided we find that he really has gone away.

AGDA. [_Tries to kiss his hand, which he pulls away_] Thank you!

JORGHEN. What are you doing, woman? I am no bishop!--But hush! Here
comes illustrious company. So I think I'll sneak off!

        _The stage has grown darker in the meantime_.

AGDA. Please, secretary, don't forget me now!

JORGHEN. So you don't trust me? Well, there is not much to trust in!
[_He goes out to the left_.

        _The_ KING _enters, wearing his big blue cloak and his soft
        black hat. He is using his boarspear as a staff._

        PRINCE JOHAN _is with him, dressed very simply, as if to avoid
        recognition_.

KING. [_Looking about_] Do you think we have been recognised?

JOHAN. No, I don't think so, father.

KING. Bing, then.

JOHAN. [_Putts the bell-rope outside the Hanseatic office]_ The bell
does not ring.

KING. Knock.

JOHAN. [_Rapping on the door_] Nobody seems to answer.

KING. [_Seating himself on the bench outside_] I must get hold of
Herman Israel this very evening--I must!

JOHAN. You are worried, father?

KING. I am certainly not at ease. [_Pause_.

JOHAN. Money cares again?

KING. Oh, don't talk of it!--Knock again.

JOHAN. [_Rapping at the door_] There is no one there.

        _A crowd of beggars enter and kneel in front of the_ KING _with
        hands held out in supplication_.

KING. Are you mocking me?

FIRST BEGGAR. We are perishing, my noble lord!

KING. I am perishing, too!--Why are you begging, anyhow?

SECOND BEGGAR. I'll tell you. Because the King has seized the tithes
that went to the poor before. And when he did so, he said: "You can
beg!"

KING. And what is he doing with the tithes of the poor?

FIRST BEGGAR. Paying Prince Eric's le-lecheries!

KING. No, paying the country's debt, you knaves! [_To_ JOHAN] Give them
money, so we get rid of them.

JOHAN. [_Distributing coins_] You'll have to share it between you, and
then away--at once!

        _The beggars leave_.

KING. I wonder who sent them? Somebody must have sent them!--Knock
again. [JOHAN _does so_] What unspeakable humiliation! You see, my son,
that no matter how high up you get, new and then you have to climb down
again. But of anything like this I never dreamt.

        [_He takes off his hat and wipes his forehead_.

JOHAN. May I speak?

KING. No, you may not, for I know what you mean to say.

        MONS NILSSON'S _widow enters, led by_ BARBRO. _Both are in
        mourning, and_ BARBRO _carries a document in her hand_.

BARBRO. [_To her mother_] That must be the Councillor himself.

WIDOW. Can that be Herman Israel who is sitting there? My eyes have
grown blind with sorrow.

BARBRO. It must be him.

        _The two women approach the_ KING.

BARBRO. [To _the_ KING] Are you the Councillor?

KING. What do you want of him?

BARBRO. Mr. Syndic, we are the bereaved dependents of Mons Nilsson, and
we have come to pray that you put in a good word for us with the King.

KING. Why do you think the Councillor's word will be of any help?

BARBRO. We have been told that he is the King's only friend, and we
thought he might help us to get back the property of which we have been
unjustly deprived.

KING. Unjustly, you say? As a traitor, Mons Nilsson was judged forfeit
of life _and_ goods--which was only just!

BARBRO. But the dower of the innocent widow should not have been taken
with the rest.

KING. What is your name?

BARBRO. I was baptised with the name of Barbro, and the King himself
acted as my godfather when he was in Dalecarlia at that time.

KING. [_Rises, but sits down again immediately_] Barbro?--Have you ever
seen the King?

BARBRO. Not since I was too small to know him. But the last time he
visited Copperberg, my father was expecting him, and we children were
to greet him with a song.

KING. What song was that?

BARBRO. I cannot sing since my father came to his death so miserably,
but it was a song about King Gustavus and the Dalecarlians, and this is
the way it ended:

    "You have by my side been fighting
    Like sturdy Swedish men.
    If God will spare my life-blood,
    I'll do you good in stead."

KING. Say something really bad about the King!

BARBRO. No, father told us we must never do that, no matter what we
might hear other people say.

KING. Did your father tell you that?

BARBRO. Yes, he did.

KING. Go in peace now. I shall speak to the King, and you shall have
your rights, for he wants to do right, and he tries to do it.

BARBRO. [_Kneels and takes hold of the_ KING'S _hand, which she
kisses_] If the King were as gracious as you are, Councillor, there
would be no cause for worry.

KING. [_Placing his hand on_ BARBRO'S _head_] He is, my child, and I
know that he won't refuse his goddaughter anything. Go in peace now!

        _The two women leave_.

KING. [_To_ JOHAN] Who can have sent them? Who?--Here I have to sit
like a defendant--I, the highest judge of the land!

JOHAN. May I say a word?

KING. No, because I can tell myself what you want to say. I can tell
that the hand of the Lord has been laid heavily upon me, although I
cannot tell why. If the Lord speaks through conscience and prayer, then
it is he who has made me act as I have acted. Why my obedience should
be punished, I cannot grasp. But I submit to a higher wisdom that lies
beyond my reason.--That girl was my goddaughter, and her father was my
friend, and I had to take his head.... Oh, cruel life, that has to be
lived nevertheless! [_Pause_] Knock again.

MARCUS. [_In travelling clothes, enters from the right_] Your Highness!
[_He kneels_.

KING. Still more?

MARCUS. A message from Herman Israel.

KING. At last!--Speak!

MARCUS. Herman Israel has this afternoon set sail for Luebeck.

KING. [_Rising_] Then I am lost!--God help me!

JOHAN. And all of us!

        _The_ KING _and_ JOHAN _go out_. MARCUS _goes over to the
        tavern and raps on one of the tables_.

AGDA. [_Appearing_] Is that you, Marcus?

MARCUS. Yes, Agda, it's me.

AGDA. Where is Jacob?

MARCUS. He has started on a journey--a very long one.

AGDA. Where?

MARCUS. I cannot tell. But he asked me to bring you his greeting and to
give you this ring.

AGDA. As a keepsake only, or as a plight of his troth?

MARCUS. Read what it says.

AGDA. [_Studying the ring_] Yes, I can spell a little "For ever," it
says. What does it mean?

MARCUS. I fear it means--farewell for ever.

AGDA. [_With a cry_] No, no, it means that he is dead!

        MARCUS _does not answer_.

AGDA. Who killed him?

MARCUS. The law and his own crime. He rebelled against his father and
his country.

AGDA. To save mine!--Oh, what is to become of me?

MARCUS. [_Shrugging his shoulders_] That's the way of the world.
Nothing but deceit and uncertainty.

AGDA. Alas, he was like all the rest!

MARCUS. Yes, all human beings are pretty much alike. He who is no worse
than the rest is no better, either. Good-bye!

_Curtain_.



SECOND SCENE


        _The study of_ MASTER OLAVUS PETRI. _There is a door on either
        side of the room_.

        OLAVUS _is writing at a table_.

        CHRISTINE _is standing beside the table with a letter in her
        hand._


CHRISTINE. Do I disturb you?

OLAVUS. [_Quietly and coldly_] Naturally, as I am writing.

CHRISTINE. Are you sure that you are writing?

OLAVUS. Absolutely sure.

CHRISTINE. But I have not seen your pen move for a long while.

OLAVUS. That was because I was thinking.

CHRISTINE. Once....

OLAVUS. Yes, once upon a time!

CHRISTINE. Can Reginald come in and say good-bye?

OLAVUS. Are we that far already?

CHRISTINE. The carriage is waiting and all his things have been packed.

OLAVUS. Let him come, then.

CHRISTINE. Are you certain that he is going to Wittenberg to study?

OLAVUS. I have seen too much uncertainty, as you know, to be certain of
anything. If you have reason to doubt the feasibility of his plans, you
had better say so.

CHRISTINE. If I had any doubts, I would not disturb you with them.

OLAVUS. Always equally amiable! Will you please ask Reginald to come
here?

CHRISTINE. I'll do whatever you command.

OLAVUS. And as I never command, but merely ask....

CHRISTINE. If you would command your precious son now and then, he
might be a little more polite and obedient to his mother.

OLAVUS. Reginald is hard, I admit, but you do wrong in trying to
educate him to suit your own high pleasure.

CHRISTINE. Do you side with the children against their parents?

OLAVUS. If I am not mistaken, I have always done so when the natural
rights of the children were concerned.

CHRISTINE. Have the children any natural rights to anything?

OLAVUS. Of course, they have! You haven't forgotten how we....

CHRISTINE. Yes, I have forgotten every bit of that old tommy-rot! I
have forgotten how you swore to love me. I have forgotten the noise
made about the pope's beard, and the stealing of the church silver,
and the humbug with the bells, and the _pure_ faith, and roast ducks
and cackling swans, and martyrs with a taste for fighting, and the
following of Christ with wine and women, and the scratching of eyes and
tearing of hair, until we now have twenty-five brand new faiths in
place of a holy Catholic Church.... I have forgotten every bit of it!

OLAVUS. Perhaps that was the best thing you could do. And will you
please ask Reginald to come here now?

CHRISTINE. Certainly, I'll ask him to come here, and it will be a great
pleasure to do so. [_She goes out to the left_.

OLAVUS. [_Alone, speaking to himself_] Happy she, who has been able to
forget! I remember everything!

CHRISTINE _returns with_ REGINALD.

REGINALD. I want mother to go out, because I can't talk when she is
here.

OLAVUS. There won't be so very much to talk about.

CHRISTINE. I won't say a word; only listen--and look at you. [_She
seats herself_.

REGINALD. No, you mustn't look at us.

OLAVUS. Be quiet, boy, and be civil to your mother! When you go
travelling, there is no telling whether you ever come back.

REGINALD. So much the better!

OLAVUS. [_Painfully impressed_] What's that?

REGINALD. I am tired of everything, and I just wish I were dead!

OLAVUS. Yes, that's the way youth talks nowadays!

REGINALD. And why? Because we don't know what to believe!

OLAVUS. Oh, you don't? And how about the articles of confession? Don't
you believe in them?

REGINALD. Believe, you say? Don't you know that belief comes as a grace
of God?

OLAVUS. Are you a Calvinist?

REGINALD. I don't know what I am. When I talk with Prince Johan, he
says I am a papist, and when I meet Prince Eric, he tells me I am a
follower of Zwingli.

OLAVUS. And now you wish to go to Wittenberg to learn the true faith
from Doctor Martin Luther?

REGINALD. I know his teachings and don't believe in them,

OLAVUS. Is that so?

REGINALD. To him belief is everything, and deeds nothing. I have
believed, but it didn't make my deeds any better at all, and so I felt
like a perfect hypocrite in the end.

OLAVUS. Is Prince Johan a Catholic?

REGINALD. So he must be, as he sticks to deeds, which ought to be the
main thing.

OLAVUS. And Prince Eric belongs to the Reformed Church, you say?

REGINALD. Yes, in so far as he believes in the dispensation of grace.
And Jorghen Persson must be a Satanist, I think. And young Sture is
absolutely an Anabaptist....

OLAVUS. Well, this is news to me! I thought the days of schism were
past....

REGINALD. Schism, yes--that's the word Prince Johan is using always. We
had a Catholic Church, and then....

OLAVUS. Oh, shut your mouth and go to Wittenberg!

REGINALD. As it is your wish, father--but I won't study any more
theology.

OLAVUS. Why not?

REGINALD. I think it is device of the devil to make people hate each
other.

CHRISTINE. Good for you, Reginald!

OLAVUS. And it had to come to this in my own house! _Pulchre, bene,
rede!_--Who, Reginald, do you think has caused this dissension under
which you young people are suffering now?

REGINALD. That's easily answered.

OLAVUS. Of course! We old ones, you mean? But we, too, were children of
our time, and were stripped of our faith by our prophets. Who is, then,
to blame?

REGINALD. No one.

OLAVUS. And what do you mean to do with your future?

REGINALD. My future? It appears to me like a grey mist without a ray
of sunlight. And should a ray ever break through, it will at once be
proved a will-o'-the-wisp leading us astray.

OLAVUS. That's just how I felt once! At your age I could see my whole
future as in vision. I foresaw the bitter cup and the pillory. And yet
I had to go on. I had to enter the mist, and I myself had to carry the
will-o'-the-wisp that _must_ lead the wanderers astray. I foretold this
very moment, even, when my son would stand before me saying: "Thus I
am, because thus you have made me!" You noticed, perhaps, that I was
not surprised--and this is the reason.

REGINALD. What am I to do? Advise me!

OLAVUS. You, no more than I, will follow the advices given you.

REGINALD. Inform me, then! Tell me: what is life?

OLAVUS. That's more than I know. But I think it must be a punishment
or an ordeal. At your years I thought I knew everything and understood
everything. Now I know nothing and understand nothing. For that reason
I rest satisfied with doing my duty and bearing what comes my way.

REGINALD. But I want to know!

OLAVUS. You want to know what is not allowed to be known. Try to know
and you will perish!--However, do you want to go or stay?

REGINALD. I am going to Wittenberg to pull Luther to pieces!

OLAVUS. [_Wholly without irony_] That's the way to speak! O thou
splendid youth with thy Alexandrian regret that there are no more
things to pull to pieces!

REGINALD. Are you not a Lutheran?

OLAVUS. I am a Protestant.

CHRISTINE. If you have finished now, I shall ask permission to tell in
a single word what Luther is--just one word!

OLAVUS. Oh, do, before you burst!

CHRISTINE. Luther is dead!

OLAVUS. Dead?

CHRISTINE. That's what my brother-in-law writes me in this letter from
Magdeburg.

OLAVUS. [_Rising_] Dead! [_To_ REGINALD] My poor Alexander, what will
you pull to pieces now?

REGINALD. First the universe, and then myself.

OLAVUS. [_Pushing him toward the door at the left_] Go ahead, then, but
begin with yourself. The universe will always remain.

CHRISTINE. [_As she rises and is about to go out with_ REGINALD] Will
there be peace on earth now?

OLAVUS. That will never be!--Let me have that letter.

        CHRISTINE _and_ REGINALD _go out to the left_.

        _While_ OLAVUS _is reading the letter, a hard knock is heard at
        the right-hand door_.

OLAVUS. Come!

        _The knock is repeated_. OLAVUS _goes to the door and opens it.
        The_ KING _enters, wearing his big hat and his cloak, which he
        throws of_.

OLAVUS. The King!

KING. [_Very excited_] Yes, but for how long? Do you know who Dacke
is?--A farm labourer who has killed a bailiff; a common thief and
incendiary, who is now writing to me with a demand of answer. I am
to take pen in hand and open correspondence with a scamp like him!
Do you know that he has crossed the Kolmord Forests and stands with
one foot in West Gothia and the other in East Gothia?--Who is back
of him? The Emperor, the Elector Frederick of the Palatinate, Magnus
Haraldsson, the runaway Bishop of Skara, the Duke of Mecklenburg. The
Emperor wishes to put the children of Christian the Tyrant back on the
throne.[3] But what troubles me more than anything else is to find the
Luebeckians and Herman Israel on the same side--my old friend Herman! I
ask you how it can be possible. And who has done this to me? Who?--Have
you not a word to say?

OLAVUS. What can I say, and what--_may_ I say?

KING. Don't be hard on me, Olof, and don't be vengeful, I am nothing
but an unfortunate human creature who has had to drink humiliation like
water, and I come to you as my spiritual guide. I am in despair because
I fear that the Lord has deserted me for ever.--What an infernal notion
of mine that was to take the head of the Dalecarlians just now, when I
am in such need of them! Do you think that deed was displeasing to the
Lord? But if I have sinned like David, you must be my Nathan.

OLAVUS. I have lost the power of prophecy, and I am not the right man
to inflict punishment.

KING. Console me, then, Olof.

OLAVUS. I cannot, because only those who repent can accept consolation.

KING. You mean that I have transgressed--that I have gone too far?
Speak up! But do it like a servant of the Lord, and not like a
conceited schoolmaster.... Have I gone too far?

OLAVUS. That is not the way to put the question. The proper way is to
ask whether the others have any right on their side.

KING. Go ahead and ask!

OLAVUS. Dacke is the mouthpiece of warranted dissatisfaction. Being
the brother-in-law of Christian II, the Emperor is the guardian of his
children, and they have inherited a claim to the Swedish throne, as
the constitution cannot be cancelled by a rebellion.[4] Bishop Magnus
Haraldsson is the spokesman of all the illegally exiled bishops.

KING. Illegally, you say?

OLAVUS. [_Raising his voice_] Yes, because the law of Sweden does not
drive any man away on account of his faith.

KING. Take care!

OLAVUS. Too late now!--The dissatisfaction of the peasants is
warranted, because the Riksdag at Vesterås authorised the King to seize
only the property of bishops and convents. When he took what belonged
to parish churches and private persons, he became guilty of a crime.

KING. You are a daring man!

OLAVUS. Nothing compared with what I used to be!--As far as Herman
Israel is concerned, he called recently on the King to offer a treaty
of friendship, and it was stupid of the King to reject it.

KING. Stop!

OLAVUS. Not yet!--The gold and silver of the churches was meant to pay
the debt to Luebeck, and much of it was used for that purpose, but a
considerable part found its way to Eskil's Chamber under the Royal
Palace, and has since been wasted on Prince Eric's silly courtships
among other things....

KING. The devil you say!

OLAVUS. Well, Queen Elizabeth is merely making fun of him.

KING. Do you know that?

OLAVUS. I do.--The bells were also to be used in payment of the debt to
Luebeck, but a part of them went to the foundry and were turned into
cannon, which was not right.

KING. Is that so?

OLAVUS. Add also that the Convent of Vreta was left unmolested
in violation of the ordinance concerning the closing of all such
places--and for no other reason than that the King's mother-in-law
happened to be a Catholic. This is a cowardly and mischievous omission
that has caused much bad blood.

KING. The convent is to be closed.

OLAVUS. It should be closed _now_, and it is not!--If I were to sum
up what is reprehensible in my great King, I should call it a lack of
piety.

KING. That's the worst yet! What do you mean?

OLAVUS. Piety is the respect shown by the stronger even if he be a man
of destiny--for the feelings of the weaker, when these spring from a
childlike, and for that reason religious, mind.

KING. Oh, is that what it is?

OLAVUS. Now I have said my say.

KING. Yes, so you have--time and again.

OLAVUS. And if my King had been willing to listen now and then, he
would have learned a great deal more. But it is a common fault of
princes that they won't listen to anybody but themselves.

KING. Well, I never heard the like of it! I am astounded--most of all
because I haven't killed you on the spot!

OLAVUS. Why don't you?

KING. [_Rises and goes toward_ OLAVUS, _who remains standing unabashed,
looking firmly at the approaching_ KING; _the latter withdraws backward
and sits down again; for a few moments the two men stare at each other
in silence; then the_ KING _says]_ Who are you?

OLAVUS. A humble instrument of the Lord, shaped to serve what is really
great--that marvellous man of God, to whom it was granted to unite all
Swedish men and lands.

KING. That was granted Engelbrecht, too, and his reward was the axe
that split his head.[5] Is that to be my reward, too?

OLAVUS. I don't think so, your Highness, but it depends on yourself.

KING. What am I to do?

OLAVUS. What you advised me to do when I was carried away by the zeal
of my youth.

KING. And you think it necessary to return that advice to me now?

OLAVUS. Why not? I have learned from life, and you have forgotten.

KING. What am I to do?

OLAVUS. Answer Dacke's letter.

KING. Never! Am I to bow down to a vagabond?

OLAVUS. The Lord sometimes uses mere vagabonds for our humiliation.
Picture it to yourself as an ordeal by fire.

KING. [_Rising and walking the floor_] There is truth in what you say.
I can feel it, but it does not fetch bottom in my mind. Say one word
more.

OLAVUS. Dacke will be right as long as you are in the wrong, and God
will be with him until you take your place on the side of right.

KING. I can't bend!

OLAVUS. Then you'll be broken by someone else.

KING. [_Walking back and forth_] Are you thinking of the Dalecarlians?
Have you heard of a rising among them on account of the executions?

OLAVUS. Such a thing has been rumoured.

KING. I am lost.

OLAVUS. Write to Dacke!

KING. [_Without conviction_] I won't.

OLAVUS. The Emperor does.

KING. That's true! If the Emperor can write to him, why shouldn't
I?--But it is perfectly senseless. Who is this mysterious man who never
appears?

OLAVUS. Perhaps another marvellous man of God--in his own way.

KING. I must see him face to face. I'll write and offer him
safe-conduct, so that I can talk with him. That's what I'll do.--Bring
me pen and paper! Or you write, and I'll dictate.

        OLAVUS _seats himself at the table_.

KING. How do we begin? What am I to call him?

OLAVUS. Let us merely put down "To Nils Dacke."

KING. Oh, his name is Nils? After St. Nicolaus, who comes with rods for
children on the sixth of December?[6] [_Pause_] Write now.... No, I'll
go home and do the writing myself.... Have you heard that Luther is
dead?

OLAVUS. I have, your Highness.

KING. He was a splendid man! May he rest in peace!--Yes, such as he
was, he was a fine man, but we got rather too much of him.

OLAVUS. Too many dogmas and not enough of religion.

KING. He was an obstinate fellow and went too far. What he needed was
a taskmaster like you to call him to terms now and then.

OLAVUS. I hope the time of schism and dissension will come to an end
now.

KING. A time of dissension you may well call it!--Good-bye, Olof. [_As_
OLAVUS _makes a mien of saying something_] Yes, yes, I _will_ write!

_Curtain_.


[1] A rough and inaccessible forest region on the eastern shore of Lake
Vettern, marking the border-line between the province of Småland in the
south and Ostergötland (East Gothia) in the north.

[2] As far back as we know the two principal ornaments of a Swedish
bride have been the crown--sometimes woven out of myrtle and sometimes
made of metal and semi-precious stones--and the wreath, always made of
myrtle.

[3] The Elector Frederick was a son-in-law of the deposed Christian II
of Denmark, and also one of the trusted liegemen of Emperor Charles V,
who hoped to see him the head of a reunited Scandinavia dominated by
German influences.

[4] Christian II was married to Isabelle, sister of Charles V.

[5] Engelbrecht Engelbrechtsson, a free miner of Dalecarlia, was the
first one of a series of notable chieftains who led the Swedish people
in their determination to rid the country of the Danish kings after
these had shown a growing inclination to treat Sweden as a Danish
province, and not as an independent kingdom, united on equal terms
with Denmark and Norway. At the head of the Dalecarlians, Engelbrecht
began the work of liberation in 1434, and was remarkably successful
in a short time. Unfortunately, he was treacherously and shamefully
killed while crossing the Lake Maelaren only two years later. To the
Swedes he has ever since been the symbol of their national independence
and unity, and he, the simple country squire, remains to this day one
of the most beloved and revered figures in Swedish history. It is to
him Barbro refers in the opening scenes of the play, and his name is
heard again in the closing scenes, with the appearance of his simpler
namesake.

[6] An old Swedish custom and superstition, prescribing that every
child must be spanked on the date mentioned in order to insure its
obedience during the whole ensuing year. That custom still survived
when the translator was a child, although for many decades the spanking
had been a mere formality serving as an excuse for some little gift or
treat.




ACT V




        _The terrace in front of the Royal Palace, with trimmed hedges,
        statuary, and a fountain. Chairs, benches, and tables are
        placed about. The near background shows a balustrade with
        Tuscan columns, on which are placed flowers in faïence pots.
        Beyond the balustrade appear tree tops, and over these tower
        the tops of masts, from which blue and yellow flags are flying.
        In the far background, a number of church spires_.

        _The_ MOTHER-IN-LAW _of the_ KING _is on the terrace in her
        Cistercian dress_.


QUEEN. [_Enters_] For the last time I beg you, mother, don't wear that
dress!

MOTHER-IN-LAW. It is my festive garb, and I am as proud of it as you of
your ermine robe.

QUEEN. What is the use of being proud? The day of disaster is upon us
all, and we must hold together.

MOTHER-IN-LAW. Let us do so then, and have peace.

QUEEN. Yes, so you say, but you won't even change dress for the sake of
the country's peace.

MOTHER-IN-LAW. I don't change faith as you change clothes, and there is
a solemn vow to God connected with this dress. The people are making
threats against my life. Let them take it! I have my grave-clothes on.

QUEEN. Don't you know that we may have to flee this very day, if the
news should prove as bad as yesterday?

MOTHER-IN-LAW. I will not flee.

QUEEN. Everything has already been packed by order of the King, and our
sloop lies at the foot of the southern hills, ready to hoist sail.

MOTHER-IN-LAW. I have nothing to pack, because I own nothing. "Be thou
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life." That's what
I used to learn. But you have sold your birthright for a crown which
soon will no longer be yours.

QUEEN. Go on and punish me; it feels like a relief.

        PRINCE ERIC _appears on the terrace; his dress and appearance
        are orderly, and his mien subdued_.

MOTHER-IN-LAW. Can you tell me what has come over Eric these last days?
He looks quite submissive, and something new has come into his face
that used to be so hard.

QUEEN. I don't know, but they say that he has changed his ways and
cannot bear the company of Jorghen. I have heard whispers about a
serious affection....

MOTHER-IN-LAW. No!

QUEEN. [_To_ ERIC] What news do you bring?

ERIC. [_Gently and respectfully_] No news at all, mother.

QUEEN. [_To her mother_] He called me mother! [_To_ ERIC] How fare you,
Eric? Is life heavy?

ERIC. Heavier than it was the day before yesterday.

QUEEN. What happened yesterday?

ERIC. What happens to a human being only once in a lifetime.--Are you
much wiser now?

QUEEN. [_To her mother_] How childlike he has grown! [_To_ Eric] Have
you heard anything of your friend Jacob?

ERIC. Yes, he was my real friend, and so they took his head.

QUEEN. Now you are unjust. There has been no attempt to take the head
of Jorghen....

ERIC. He is no longer my friend. [_Peevishly_] But now I don't want to
be questioned any longer, least of all about my secrets--that is, about
the secrets of my heart.

Queen. [_To her mother_] He is quite charming in his childishness.
Apparently he would love to talk of his secret.

        PRINCE JOHAN _enters_.

ERIC. [_Going to meet him_] Soon we may have nothing left to fight
over, brother Johan, and so--it seems to me we may as well be friends.

JOHAN. With a right good heart, brother! Nothing could give me greater
pleasure.

ERIC. Give me your hand! [_They shake hands_] I don't want to be the
enemy of any human being after this.

        [_He goes out, deeply moved_.

MOTHER-IN-LAW. [_To_ Johan] What's the matter with Eric?

JOHAN. He has found a sweetheart, they say.

QUEEN. What did I say?

MOTHER-IN-LAW. Are you coming with me to the mass in the chapel, Johan?
[_When_ JOHAN _hesitates and does not answer, she says sharply_] Johan!

QUEEN. Mother!

MOTHER-IN-LAW. Is he free to follow his conscience, or is he not?

QUEEN. If you will leave his conscience alone, he will be free.

MOTHER-IN-LAW. Well, I am going, and you know where, Johan. [_She goes
out_.

QUEEN. Johan!

JOHAN. What do you wish?

QUEEN. That you do not desert your childhood faith.

JOHAN. My childhood faith, which I got from my nurse, and not from you,
was also the childhood faith of my father. Why did you not give me
yours?

QUEEN. Yes, punish me. You have a right to do so. Everything comes home
to us now. I was young then. Life was nothing but a game. The King
demanded my company at banquets and festivities, and so your cradle was
left unattended and unguarded. Those were the days when we were drunk
with victory and happiness. And now!--Go where you find it possible to
worship, Johan, and pray for your mother!

JOHAN. If it hurts my gracious mother, I won't go.

QUEEN. Pray for us all! [_In a lowered voice_] I do not know the new
prayers and must not use the old ones!--Hush now! The King is coming.

        PRINCE JOHAN _goes in the direction previously taken by the_
        KING'S MOTHER-IN-LAW.

        _The_ KING _enters, holding a letter in his hand. He is
        accompanied by_ MASTER OLAVUS PETRI.

KING. [_To the_ QUEEN] Have everything ready for the start. We are lost!

QUEEN. The will of God be done!

KING. That's what seems to be happening. Go and look after your house,
child.

        _The_ QUEEN _goes out_.

KING. [_To_ OLAVUS] This is the situation. Dacke answers that he
does not care to see "that rebel, and perjurer, and breaker of
safe-conducts, Ericsson." He rails me Ericsson, mind you. His people
have reached as far north as Södermanland--which means that they are
right at our gates! Furthermore, two thousand Dalecarlians are encamped
at the North Gate. Their intentions are not known, but can easily be
guessed. A fine prophet you are, Olof!

OLAVUS. We have not seen the end yet.

KING. Where do you get your confidence from?

OLAVUS. That's more than I can tell, but I know that everything will
end well.

KING. You say that you know? How do you know? I have ceased to believe
anything--except in the wrath of God, which has been turned against me.
I am now waiting for the axe. Good and well! I have done my service
and am now to be discharged. That's why I wish to leave before I am
kicked out.--Do you know what day it is to-day? Nobody has thought of
it, and I didn't remember until just now.... It is Midsummer Day: _my_
day, which no one celebrates. A generation ago I made my entry into
the capital on this day. That was the greatest moment of my life. I
thought the work of liberation was done, and I thanked God for it!--But
it had not been done, and I am not done with it yet.--The Dalecarlians
rose. I subdued them, and thought that I was done, which I was not.
Twice more they rose, and each time I gave thanks to God, thinking I
had done--which was not the case. The lords of West Gothia rose. I
squelched them, and was happy, thinking that I surely must have done
by that time--which I had not. And now, Olof?--We are never done until
done for--and that's where I am now!

OLAVUS. Oh, no, there is a whole lot left.

KING. Where do you get your fixed ideas from? Have you heard some bird
sing, or have you been dreaming?

OLAVUS. Neither.

KING. [_Listening_] Listen! That's the sound of birch-horns. Do they
mean to give me a crown of birch, like the one I gave to Peder the
Chancellor and Master Knut? Or is it the scaffold that.... that?...

OLAVUS. Oh, don't!

KING. What was it you called that thing--piety? Much it would have
availed me to have piety at Larv Heath or Tuna Plain![1]--No, I have
been right, right, right, so God help me, amen!

        OLAVUS _makes no answer_.

KING. [_Listening_] They have drums, too.--Oh, everything comes
home!--Do you think I can get out of this, Olof?

OLAVUS. I do! And let me give you a final piece of advice: don't leave!

KING. I don't see how it can be avoided. Do you think I'll let them
take my head?--Do you know, I can actually hear the tramp-tramp of
their feet as they come marching through the North Gate. And that's the
Dalecarlians--my own Dalecarlians! Oh, life is cruel! Can you hear it?
Tramp--tramp--tramp! Do you think I can get out of this?

OLAVUS. I do.

KING. When the sun rises to-morrow I shall know my fate. I wish I were
that far already!--Now I hear something else! [_The reading of a litany
in Latin is faintly heard from the outside_] What is that?

OLAVUS. [_Goes to the balustrade and looks over it_] The Queen's mother
is reading the Romish litany.

KING. But I hear a male voice, too.

OLAVUS. That's Prince Johan.

KING. Johan?--So I must drink that cup, too! I wonder if the cup is
full yet? Is everything that I have built to be torn down?

OLAVUS. Everything you have torn down must be built up again.

KING. Johan a papist, and Eric a Calvinist!--Do you remember the days
when we were crying in the words of Von Hutten: "The souls are waking
up, and it is a joy to live"? A joy to live, indeed--ha-ha! And the
souls woke up to find their feet on the pillows! Was it you who said
that the gods are playing with us?--Hush! I was mistaken a while ago!
It's the North Bridge they are crossing! Can't you hear their heavy
tread on the planking of the bridge? Let us fly! [_He puts a document
on a table_] Here I place my resignation.

OLAVUS. [_Seizing the document_] I'll take care of that. I'll keep
it--as a memento! And now we'll hoist a flag of truce.

        _He pulls a white cloth from one of the tables and ties it to
        the branch of a tree_.

PRINCE ERIC. [_Enters_] Father!

KING. Croak away, raven!

ERIC. Our last hope is gone! The sloop has dragged its anchor and gone
ashore.

KING. [_In desperation_] And lightning has struck the nursery, and the
grasshoppers have eaten the crops, and the waters are rising, and....

ERIC. The Dalecarlians are negotiating with the palace guards, and they
are awfully drunk.

KING. [_Sitting down_] Come on, death!

ERIC. [_Listening_] I can hear their wooden shoes on the garden stairs!
[_He goes to the balustrade_.

KING. [_Counting on his fingers_] Anders Persson, Mons Nilsson, Master
John.

ERIC. [_Drawing his sword_] Now he is here!

        _He can be seen following somebody on the other side of the
        balustrade with his eyes_.

KING. [_As before_] Inghel Hansson, Master Stig, Nils of Söderby. God
is just!

ENGELBRECHT. [_Enters; he is in the happy stage of intoxication, but
in full control of his movements for all that; he looks about with a
broad grin on his face, a little embarrassed, and yet pleased; then he
says to_ ERIC] Are you the King?

        _He puts his hat on the ground and takes off his wooden shoes_.

KING. [_Rising and pushing_ ERIC _aside_] No, I am the King!

ENGELBRECHT. Yes, so I see now!

KING. Who are you?

ENGELBRECHT. [_Faltering_] Don't you know me?...

KING. I don't.

ENGELBRECHT. [_Pulls a dagger with silver handle out of his long
stocking and shows it to the_ KING, _grinning more broadly than ever_]
Well, don't you know this one?

KING. I don't understand at all. What is your name?

ENGELBRECHT. Well--it happens to be Engelbrecht!

KING. Eng-el-brecht?

ENGELBRECHT. It sounds mighty big, but I am not of _that_ family.--You
see, it was like this--once upon a time the King--who was no king at
all then--oh, mercy, but I am drunk!... Well, it was me who followed
you on skis to the border of Norway, and that time you gave me this
here dagger and said: "If you ever need me, come on!" Now I've come,
and here I am! And I wish only that I was not so frightfully drunk!

KING. And what do you want?

ENGELBRECHT. What I want?--I want to fight that man Dacke, of course,
and that's what the rest of them want, too.

KING. You want to _fight_ Dacke?

ENGELBRECHT. Why do you think we have come, anyhow?

KING. [_Raising his arms toward heaven_] Eternal God, now you have
punished me!

ENGELBRECHT. Is it all right? You see, the rest are down there and
they'd like to do something to celebrate the day.

KING. _Is it all right?_--Ask me for a favour!

ENGELBRECHT. [_After thinking hard_] I'd like to shake hands!

        _The_ KING _holds out his hand_.

ENGELBRECHT. [_Looking at the_ King's _hand_] My, what a fist! Hard as
nails, but clean! Yes, and a devil of a fellow you are, all in all!--I
must say I was rather scared when I came here!

KING. Are all the rest of them as drunk as you are?

ENGELBRECHT. About the same! But they can toot the horns for all that.
[_He goes to the balustrade, waves his hand and utters the yell used by
the Dalecarlians in calling their cows_] Poo-ala! Poo-ala! Poo Oy-ala!
Oy-ala! Oy!

        _The blowing of horns and beating of drums is heard from the
        outside_.

        _The_ KING _goes to the balustrade and waxes his hand_.

        _The_ MOTHER-IN-LAW _appears in court dress_.

        _The_ QUEEN _enters and goes to the_ KING, _who folds her in
        his arms_.

        PRINCE JOHAN _enters and goes to the balustrade_.

KING. [_With raised arms_] You have punished me, O Lord, and I thank
thee!

_Curtain_


