
                     THE RED ROOM

CHAPTER I

A BIRD'S-EYE VIEW OF STOCKHOLM


It was an evening in the beginning of May. The little garden on "Moses
Height," on the south side of the town had not yet been thrown open to
the public, and the flower-beds were still unturned. The snowdrops had
worked through the accumulations of last year's dead leaves, and were
on the point of closing their short career and making room for the
crocuses which had found shelter under a barren pear tree; the elder
was waiting for a southerly wind before bursting into bloom, but the
tightly closed buds of the limes still offered cover for love-making to
the chaffinches, busily employed in building their lichen-covered nests
between trunk and branch. No human foot had trod the gravel paths since
last winter's snow had melted, and the free and easy life of beasts and
flowers was left undisturbed. The sparrows industriously collected all
manner of rubbish, and stowed it away under the tiles of the Navigation
School. They burdened themselves with scraps of the rocket-cases of
last autumn's fireworks, and picked the straw covers off the young
trees, transplanted from the nursery in the Deer Park only a year
ago--nothing escaped them. They discovered shreds of muslin in the
summer arbours; the splintered leg of a seat supplied them with tufts
of hair left on the battlefield by dogs which had not been fighting
there since Josephine's day. What a life it was!

The sun was standing over the Liljeholm, throwing sheaves of rays
towards the east; they pierced the columns of smoke of Bergsund,
flashed across the Riddarfjörd, climbed to the cross of the Riddarholms
church, flung themselves on to the steep roof of the German church
opposite, toyed with the bunting displayed by the boats on the pontoon
bridge, sparkled in the windows of the chief custom-house, illuminated
the woods of the Liding Island, and died away in a rosy cloud far, far
away in the distance where the sea was. And from thence the wind came
and travelled back by the same way, over Vaxholm, past the fortress,
past the custom-house and along the Sikla Island, forcing its way in
behind the Hästarholm, glancing at the summer resorts; then out again
and on, on to the hospital Daniken; there it took fright and dashed
away in a headlong career along the southern shore, noticed the smell
of coal, tar and fish-oil, came dead against the city quay, rushed up
to Moses Height, swept into the garden and buffeted against a wall.

The wall was opened by a maid-servant, who, at the very moment, was
engaged in peeling off the paper pasted over the chinks of the double
windows; a terrible smell of dripping, beer dregs, pine needles, and
sawdust poured out and was carried away by the wind, while the maid
stood breathing the fresh air through her nostrils. It plucked the
cotton-wool, strewn with barberry berries, tinsel and rose leaves, from
the space between the windows and danced it along the paths, joined by
sparrows and chaffinches who saw here the solution of the greater part
of their housing problem.

Meanwhile, the maid continued her work at the double windows; in a few
minutes the door leading from the restaurant stood open, and a man,
well but plainly dressed, stepped out into the garden. There was
nothing striking about his face beyond a slight expression of care and
worry which disappeared as soon as he had emerged from the stuffy room
and caught sight of the wide horizon. He turned to the side from whence
the wind came, opened his overcoat, and repeatedly drew a deep breath
which seemed to relieve his heart and lungs. Then he began to stroll up
and down the barrier which separated the garden from the cliffs in the
direction of the sea.

Far below him lay the noisy, reawakening town; the steam cranes whirred
in the harbour, the iron bars rattled in the iron weighing machine, the
whistles of the lock-keepers shrilled, the steamers at the pontoon
bridge smoked, the omnibuses rumbled over the uneven paving-stones;
noise and uproar in the fish market, sails and flags on the water
outside; the screams of the sea-gulls, bugle-calls from the dockyard,
the turning out of the guard, the clattering of the wooden shoes of the
working-men--all this produced an impression of life and bustle, which
seemed to rouse the young man's energy; his face assumed an expression
of defiance, cheerfulness and resolution, and as he leaned over the
barrier and looked at the town below, he seemed to be watching an
enemy; his nostrils expanded, his eyes flashed, and he raised his
clenched fist as if he were challenging or threatening the poor town.

The bells of St. Catherine's chimed seven; the splenetic treble of St.
Mary's seconded; the basses of the great church, and the German church
joined in, and soon the air was vibrating with the sound made by the
seven bells of the town; then one after the other relapsed into
silence, until far away in the distance only the last one of them could
be heard singing its peaceful evensong; it had a higher note, a purer
tone and a quicker tempo than the others--yes, it had! He listened and
wondered whence the sound came, for it seemed to stir up vague memories
in him. All of a sudden his face relaxed and his features expressed the
misery of a forsaken child. And he was forsaken; his father and mother
were lying in the churchyard of St. Clara's, from whence the bell could
still be heard; and he was a child; he still believed in everything,
truth and fairy tales alike.

The bell of St. Clara's was silent, and the sound of footsteps on the
gravel path roused him from his reverie. A short man with side-whiskers
came towards him from the verandah; he wore spectacles, apparently more
for the sake of protecting his glances than his eyes, and his malicious
mouth was generally twisted into a kindly, almost benevolent,
expression. He was dressed in a neat overcoat with defective buttons, a
somewhat battered hat, and trousers hoisted at half-mast. His walk
indicated assurance as well as timidity. His whole appearance was so
indefinite that it was impossible to guess at his age or social
position. He might just as well have been an artisan as a government
official; his age was anything between twenty-nine and forty-five
years. He was obviously flattered to find himself in the company of the
man whom he had come to meet, for he raised his bulging hat with
unusual ceremony and smiled his kindliest smile.

"I hope you haven't been waiting, assessor?"

"Not for a second; it's only just struck seven. Thank you for coming. I
must confess that this meeting is of the greatest importance to me; I
might almost say it concerns my whole future, Mr. Struve."

"Bless me! Do you mean it?"

Mr. Struve blinked; he had come to drink a glass of toddy and was very
little inclined for a serious conversation. He had his reasons for
that.

"We shall be more undisturbed if we have our toddy outside, if you
don't mind," continued the assessor.

Mr. Struve stroked his right whisker, put his hat carefully on his head
and thanked the assessor for his invitation; but he looked uneasy.

"To begin with, I must ask you to drop the 'assessor,'" began the young
man. "I've never been more than a regular assistant, and I cease to be
even that from to-day; I'm Mr. Falk, nothing else."

"What?"

Mr. Struve looked as if he had lost a distinguished friend, but he kept
his temper.

"You're a man with liberal tendencies...."

Mr. Struve tried to explain himself, but Falk continued:

"I asked you to meet me here in your character of contributor to the
liberal _Red Cap_."

"Good heavens! I'm such a very unimportant contributor...."

"I've read your thundering articles on the working man's question, and
all other questions which nearly concern us. We're in the year three,
in Roman figures, for it is now the third year of the new Parliament,
and soon our hopes will have become realities. I've read your excellent
biographies of our leading politicians in the _Peasant's Friend_, the
lives of those men of the people, who have at last been allowed to
voice what oppressed them for so long; you're a man of progress and
I've a great respect for you."

Struve, whose eyes had grown dull instead of kindling at the fervent
words, seized with pleasure the proffered safety-valve.

"I must admit," he said eagerly, "that I'm immensely pleased to find
myself appreciated by a young and--I must say it--excellent man like
you, assessor; but, on the other hand, why talk of such grave, not to
say sad things, when we're sitting here, in the lap of nature, on the
first day of spring, while all the buds are bursting and the sun is
pouring his warmth on the whole creation! Let's snap our fingers at
care and drink our glass in peace. Excuse me--I believe I'm your
senior--and--I venture--to propose therefore...."

Falk, who like a flint had gone out in search of steel, realized that
he had struck wood. He accepted the proposal without eagerness. And the
new brothers sat side by side, and all they had to tell each other was
the disappointment expressed in their faces.

"I mentioned a little while ago," Falk resumed, "that I've broken
to-day with my past life and thrown up my career as a government
employé. I'll only add that I intend taking up literature."

"Literature? Good Heavens! Why? Oh, but that _is_ a pity!"

"It isn't; but I want you to tell me how to set about finding work."

"H'm! That's really difficult to say. The profession is crowded with so
many people of all sorts. But you mustn't think of it. It really is a
pity to spoil your career; the literary profession is a bad one."

Struve looked sorry, but he could not hide a certain satisfaction at
having met a friend in misfortune.

"But tell me," he continued, "Why are you throwing up a career which
promises a man honours as well as influence?"

"Honours to those who have usurped the power, and influence to the most
unscrupulous."

"Stuff! It isn't really as bad as all that?"

"Isn't it? Well, then I must speak more plainly. I'll show you the
inner working of one of the six departments for which I had put down.
The first five I left at once for the very simple reason that there was
no room for me. Whenever I went and asked whether there was anything
for me to do, I was told No! And I never saw anybody doing anything.
And that was in the busy departments, like the Committee on Brandy
Distilleries, the Direct Taxation Office and The Board of
Administration of Employés' Pensions. But when I noticed the swarming
crowd of officials, the idea struck me that the department which had to
pay out all the salaries must surely be very busy indeed. I therefore
put my name down for the Board of Payment of Employés' Salaries."

"And did you go there?" asked Struve, beginning to feel interested.

"Yes. I shall never forget the great impression made on me by my visit
to this thoroughly well-organized department. I went there at eleven
o'clock one morning, because this is supposed to be the time when the
offices open. In the waiting-room I found two young messengers
sprawling on a table, on their stomachs, reading the _Fatherland_."

"The '_Fatherland_'?"

Struve, who had up to the present been feeding the sparrows with sugar,
pricked up his ears.

"Yes. I said 'good morning.' A feeble wriggling of the gentlemen's
backs indicated that they accepted my good morning without any decided
displeasure; one of them even went to the length of waggling the heel
of his right foot, which might have been intended as a substitute for a
handshake. I asked whether either of the gentlemen were disengaged and
could show me the offices. Both of them declared that they were unable
to do so, because their orders were not to leave the waiting-room. I
inquired whether there were any other messengers. Yes, there were
others. But the chief messenger was away on a holiday; the first
messenger was on leave; the second was not on duty; the third had gone
to the post; the fourth was ill; the fifth had gone to fetch some
drinking water; the sixth was in the yard 'where he remained all day
long'; moreover, no official ever arrived before one o'clock. This was
a hint to me that my early, inconvenient visit was not good form, and
at the same time a reminder that the messengers, also, were government
employés.

"But when I stated that I was firmly resolved on seeing the offices, so
as to gain an idea of the division of labour in so important and
comprehensive a department, the younger of the two consented to come
with me. When he opened the door I had a magnificent view of a suite of
sixteen rooms of various sizes. There must be work here, I thought,
congratulating myself on my happy idea of coming. The crackling of
sixteen birchwood fires in sixteen tiled stoves interrupted in the
pleasantest manner the solitude of the place."

Struve, who had become more and more interested fumbled for a pencil
between the material and lining of his waistcoat, and wrote "16" on his
left cuff.

"'This is the adjuncts' room,' explained the messenger.

"'I see! Are there many adjuncts in this department?' I asked.

"'Oh, yes! More than enough!'"

"'What do they do all day long?'"

"'Oh! They write, of course, a little....'"

"He was speaking familiarly, so that I thought it time to interrupt
him. After wandering through the copyists', the notaries', the clerk's,
the controller's and his secretary's, the reviser's and his
secretary's, the public prosecutor's, the registrar of the exchequer's,
the master of the rolls' and the librarian's, the treasurer's, the
cashier's, the procurator's, the protonotary's, the keeper of the
minutes', the actuary's, the keeper of the records', the secretary's,
the first clerk's, and the head of the department's rooms, we came to a
door which bore in gilt letters the words: 'The President.' I was going
to open the door but the messenger stopped me; genuinely uneasy, he
seized my arm and whispered: 'Shsh!'--'Is he asleep?' I asked, my
thoughts busy with an old rumour. 'For God's sake, be quiet! No one may
enter here unless the president rings the bell.' 'Does he often ring?'
'No, I've never heard him ringing in my time, and I've been here twelve
months.' He was again inclined to be familiar, so I said no more.

"About noon the adjuncts began to arrive, and to my amazement I found
in them nothing but old friends from the Committee on Brandy
Distilleries, and the Board of Administration of Employés' Pensions. My
amazement grew when the registrar from the Inland Revenue Office
strolled into the actuary's room, and made himself as comfortable in
his easy-chair as he used to do in the Inland Revenue Office.

"I took one of the young men aside and asked him whether it would not
be advisable for me to call on the president. 'Shsh!' was his
mysterious reply, while he took me into room No. 8. Again this
mysterious shsh!

"The room which we had just entered was quite as dark as the rest of
them, but it was much dirtier. The horsehair stuffing was bursting
through the leather covering of the furniture; thick dust lay on the
writing-table; by the side of an inkstand, in which the ink had dried
long ago, lay an unused stick of sealing-wax with the former owner's
name marked on it in Anglo-Saxon letters; in addition there was a pair
of paper shears whose blades were held together by rust; a date rack
which had not been turned since midsummer five years ago; a State
directory five years old; a sheet of blotting-paper with Julius Cæsar,
Julius Cæsar, Julius Cæsar written all over it, a hundred times at
least, alternating with as many Father Noahs.

"'This is the office of the Master of the Rolls; we shall be
undisturbed here,' said my friend.

"'Doesn't the Master of the Rolls come here, then?' I asked.

"'He hasn't been here these five years, and now he's ashamed to turn
up.'

"'But who does his work?'

"'The librarian.'

"'But what is his work in a department like the Board of Payment of
Employés' Salaries?'

"'The messengers sort the receipts, chronologically and alphabetically,
and send them to the book-binders; the librarian supervises their being
placed on shelves specially adapted for the purpose.'"

The conversation now seemed to amuse Struve; he scribbled a word every
now and then on his cuff, and as Falk paused he thought it incumbent on
him to ask an important question.

"But how did the Master of the Rolls get his salary?"

"It was sent to his private address. Wasn't that simple enough?
However, my young friend advised me to present myself to the actuary
and ask him to introduce me to the other employés who were now dropping
in to poke the fires in their tiled stoves and enjoy the last glimmer
of the glowing wood. My friend told me that the actuary was an
influential and good-natured individual, very susceptible to little
courtesies.

"I, who had come across him in his character as Registrar of the
Exchequer, had formed a different opinion of him, but believing that my
friend knew better, I went to see him.

"The redoubtable actuary sat in a capacious easy-chair with his feet on
a reindeer skin. He was engaged in seasoning a real meerschaum pipe,
sewn up in soft leather. So as not to appear idle, he was glancing at
yesterday's _Post_, acquainting himself in this way with the wishes of
the Government.

"My entrance seemed to annoy him; he pushed his spectacles on to his
bald head; hiding his right eye behind the edge of the newspaper, he
shot a conical bullet at me with the left. I proffered my request. He
took the mouthpiece of his meerschaum into his right hand and examined
it to find out how far he had coloured it. The dreadful silence which
followed confirmed my apprehensions. He cleared his throat; there was a
loud, hissing noise in the heap of glowing coal. Then he remembered the
newspaper and continued his perusal of it. I judged it wise to repeat
my request in a different form. He lost his temper. 'What the devil do
you want? What are you doing in my room? Can't I have peace in my own
quarters? What? Get out, get out, get out! sir, I say! Can't you see
that I'm busy. Go to the protonotary if you want anything! Don't come
here bothering me!'

"I went to the protonotary.

"The Committee of Supplies was sitting; it had been sitting for three
weeks already. The protonotary was in the chair and three clerks were
keeping the minutes. The samples sent in by the purveyors lay scattered
about on the tables, round which all disengaged clerks, copyists and
notaries were assembled. In spite of much diversity of opinion, it had
been agreed to order twenty reams of Lessebo paper, and after
repeatedly testing their cutting capacity, the purchase of forty-eight
pairs of Grantorp scissors, which had been awarded a prize, had been
decided on. (The actuary held twenty-five shares in this concern.) The
test writing with the steel nibs had taken a whole week, and the
minutes concerning it had taken up two reams of paper. It was now the
turn of the penknives, and the committee was intent on testing them on
the leaves of the black table.

"'I propose ordering Sheffield doubleblades No. 4, without a
corkscrew,' said the protonotary, cutting a splinter off the table
large enough to light a fire with. 'What does the first notary say?'

"The first notary, who had cut too deeply into the table, had come
across a nail and damaged an Eskilstuna No. 2, with three blades,
suggested buying the latter.

"After everybody had given his opinion and alleged reasons for holding
it, adding practical tests, the chairman suggested buying two gross of
Sheffields.

"But the first notary protested, and delivered a long speech, which was
taken down on record, copied out twice, registered, sorted
(alphabetically and chronologically), bound and placed by the
messenger--under the librarian's supervision--on a specially adapted
shelf. This protest displayed a warm, patriotic feeling; its principal
object was the demonstration of the necessity of encouraging home
industries.

"But this being equivalent to a charge brought against the
Government--seeing that it was brought against one of its employés--the
protonotary felt it his duty to meet it. He started with a historical
digression on the origin of the discount on manufactured goods--at the
word discount all the adjuncts pricked up their ears--touched on the
economic developments of the country during the last twenty years, and
went into such minute details that the clock on the Riddarholms church
struck two before he had arrived at his subject. At the fatal stroke of
the clock the whole assembly rushed from their places as if a fire had
broken out. When I asked a colleague what it all meant, the old notary,
who had heard my question, replied: 'The primary duty of a Government
employé is punctuality, sir!' At two minutes past two not a soul was
left in one of the rooms.

"'We shall have a hot day to-morrow,' whispered a colleague, as we went
downstairs. 'What in the name of fortune is going to happen?' I asked
uneasily. 'Lead pencils,' he replied. There were hot days in store for
us. Sealing-wax, envelopes, paper-knives, blotting-paper, string.
Still, it might all be allowed to pass, for every one was occupied. But
a day came when there was nothing to do. I took my courage in my hands
and asked for work. I was given seven reams of paper for making fair
copies at home, a feat by which 'I should deserve well of my country.'
I did my work in a very short time, but instead of receiving
appreciation and encouragement, I was treated with suspicion;
industrious people were not in favour. Since then I've had no work.

"I'll spare you the tedious recital of a year's humiliations, the
countless taunts, the endless bitterness. Everything which appeared
small and ridiculous to me was treated with grave solemnity, and
everything which I considered great and praiseworthy was scoffed at.
The people were called 'the mob,' and their only use was to be shot at
by the army if occasion should arise. The new form of government was
openly reviled and the peasants were called traitors.[A]"

  [A] Since the great reorganization of the public offices, this
        description is no longer true to life.

"I had to listen to this sort of thing for seven months; they began to
suspect me because I didn't join in their laughter, and challenged me.
Next time the 'opposition dogs' were attacked, I exploded and made a
speech, the result of which was that they knew where I stood, and that
I was henceforth impossible. And now I shall do what so many other
shipwrecks have done: I shall throw myself into the arms of
literature."

Struve, who seemed dissatisfied with the truncated ending, put the
pencil back, sipped his toddy and looked absent-minded. Nevertheless,
he thought he ought to say something.

"My dear fellow," he remarked at last, "you haven't yet learned the art
of living; you will find out how difficult it is to earn bread and
butter, and how it gradually becomes the main interest. One works to
eat and eats to be able to work. Believe me, who have wife and child,
that I know what I'm talking about. You must cut your coat according to
your cloth, you see--according to your cloth. And you've no idea what
the position of a writer is. He stands outside society."

"His punishment for aspiring to stand above it. Moreover, I detest
society, for it is not founded on a voluntary basis. It's a web of
lies--I renounce it with pleasure."

"It's beginning to grow chilly," said Struve.

"Yes; shall we go?"

"Perhaps we'd better."

The flame of conversation had flickered out.

Meanwhile the sun had set; the half moon had risen and hung over the
fields to the north of the town. Star after star struggled with the
daylight which still lingered in the sky; the gas-lamps were being
lighted in the town; the noise and uproar was beginning to die away.

Falk and Struve walked together in the direction of the north, talking
of commerce, navigation, the crafts, everything in fact which did not
interest them; finally, to each other's relief, they parted.

Falk strolled down River Street towards the dockyard, his brain
pregnant with new thoughts. He felt like a bird which had flown against
a window-pane and now lay bruised on the ground at the very moment when
it had spread its wings to fly towards freedom. He sat down on a seat,
listening to the splashing of the waves; a light breeze had sprung up
and rustled through the flowering maple trees, and the faint light of
the half moon shone on the black water; twenty, thirty boats lay moored
on the quay; they tore at their chains for a moment, raised their
heads, one after the other, and dived down again, underneath the water;
wind and wave seemed to drive them onward; they made little runs
towards the bridge like a pack of hounds, but the chain held them in
leash and left them kicking and stamping, as if they were eager to
break loose.

He remained in his seat till midnight; the wind fell asleep, the waves
went to rest, the fettered boats ceased tugging at their chains; the
maples stopped rustling, and the dew was beginning to fall.

Then he rose and strolled home, dreaming, to his lonely attic in the
north-eastern part of the town.

That is what young Falk did; but old Struve, who on the same day had
become a member of the staff of the _Grey Bonnet_, because the _Red
Cap_ had sacked him, went home and wrote an article for the notorious
_People's Flag_, on the Board of Payment of Employés' Salaries, four
columns at five crowns a column.




CHAPTER II

BETWEEN BROTHERS


The flax merchant, Charles Nicholas Falk--son of the late flax
merchant, one of the fifty elders of the burgesses, captain of the
infantry of militia, vestryman and member of the Board of
Administration of the Stockholm Fire Insurance, Charles John Falk, and
brother of the former assessor and present writer, Arvid Falk--had a
business or, as his enemies preferred to call it, a shop in Long Street
East, nearly opposite Pig Street, so that the young man who sat behind
the counter, surreptitiously reading a novel, could see a piece of a
steamer, the paddle-box perhaps, or the jib-boom, and the crown of a
tree on Skeppsholm, with a patch of sky above it, whenever he raised
his eyes from his book.

The shop assistant, who answered to the not unusual name of Andersson,
and he had learnt to answer to it, had just--it was early in the
morning--opened the shop, hung up outside the door a flax tress, a fish
and an eel basket, a bundle of fishing-rods, and a crawl of unstripped
quills; this done, he had swept the shop, strewn the floor with
sawdust, and sat down behind the counter. He had converted an empty
candle-box into a kind of mouse-trap, which he set with a hooked stick;
immediately on the appearance of his principal, or any of the latter's
friends, the novel on which Andersson was intent dropped into the box.
He did not seem afraid of customers; for one thing it was early in the
morning and for another he was not used to very many customers.

The business had been established in the days of the late King
Frederick--Charles Nicholas Falk had inherited this statement from his
father, to whom it had descended from his grandfather; it had
flourished and earned a good deal of money until a few years ago; but
the disastrous chamber-system killed trade, ruined all prospects,
impeded all enterprise, and threatened all citizens with bankruptcy.
So, at least, Falk said; others were inclined to believe that the
business was mismanaged; to say nothing of the fact that a dangerous
competitor had established himself close to the lock. Falk never talked
of the decline of the business if he could help it, and he was shrewd
enough carefully to choose occasion and audience whenever he touched
upon _that_ string. If an old business connexion expressed surprise, in
a friendly way, at the reduced trade, he told him that his principal
business was a wholesale trade in the provinces, and that he was
looking upon the shop merely in the light of a sign-board; nobody
doubted this, for he had, behind the shop, a small counting-house where
he generally could be found when he was not in town or at the Exchange.
But it was quite another tale if any of his acquaintances, such as the
notary or the schoolmaster, for instance, expressed the same friendly
uneasiness. Then he blamed the bad times, the result of the new
chamber-system; this alone was to blame for the stagnation of trade.

Andersson was disturbed in his reading by two or three boys who were
standing in the doorway, asking the price of the fishing-rods. Looking
out into the street he caught sight of our Mr. Arvid Falk. Falk had
lent him the book, so that it could safely be left on the counter; and
as his former playfellow entered the shop, he greeted him familiarly,
with a knowing look.

"Is he upstairs?" asked Falk, not without a certain uneasiness.

"He's at breakfast," replied Andersson, pointing to the ceiling.

A chair was pushed back on the floor above their heads.

"He's got up from the table now, Mr. Arvid."

Both young men seemed familiar with the noise and its purport. Heavy,
creaking footsteps crossed the floor, apparently in all directions, and
a subdued murmur penetrated through the ceiling to the listeners below.

"Was he at home last night?" asked Falk.

"No, he was out."

"With friends or acquaintances?"

"Acquaintances."

"Did he come home late?"

"Very late."

"Do you think he'll be coming down soon, Andersson? I don't want to go
upstairs on account of my sister-in-law."

"He'll be here directly; I can tell by his footsteps."

A door slammed upstairs; they looked at each other significantly. Arvid
made a movement towards the door, but pulled himself together.

A few moments later they heard sounds in the counting-house. A violent
cough shook the little room and then came the well-known footsteps,
saying: stamp--stamp, stamp--stamp!

Arvid went behind the counter and knocked at the door of the
counting-house.

"Come in!"

He stood before his brother, a man of forty who looked his age. He was
fifteen years older than Arvid, and for that and other reasons he had
accustomed himself to look upon his younger brother as a boy towards
whom he acted as a father. He had fair hair, a fair moustache, fair
eyebrows, and eye-lashes. He was rather stout, and that was the reason
why his boots always creaked; they groaned under the weight of his
thick-set figure.

"Oh, it's only you?" he said with good-natured contempt. This attitude
of mind was typical of the man; he was never angry with those who for
some reason or other could be considered his inferiors; he despised
them. But his face expressed disappointment; he had expected a more
satisfactory subject for an outburst; his brother was shy and modest,
and never offered resistance if he could possibly help it.

"I hope I'm not inconveniencing you, brother Charles?" asked Arvid,
standing on the threshold. This humble question disposed the brother to
show benevolence. He helped himself to a cigar from his big,
embroidered leather cigar-case, offering his brother a smoke from a box
which stood near the fire-place; that boxful--visitors' cigars, as he
frankly called them, and he was of a candid disposition--had been
through a shipwreck, which made them interesting, but did not improve
them, and a sale by auction on the strand, which had made them very
cheap.

"Well, what is it you want?" asked Charles Nicholas, lighting his
cigar, and absent-mindedly putting the match into his pocket--he could
only concentrate his thoughts on one spot inside a not very large
circumference; his tailor could have expressed the size of it in inches
after measuring him round the stomach.

"I want to talk business with you," answered Arvid, fingering his
unlighted cigar.

"Sit down!" commanded the brother.

It was customary with him to ask people to sit down whenever he
intended to take them to task; he had them under him, then, and it was
more easy to crush them--if necessary.

"Business? Are we doing business together?" he began. "I don't know
anything about it. Are you doing business? Are you?"

"I only meant to say that I should like to know whether there's
anything more coming to me?"

"What, may I ask? Do you mean money?" said Charles Nicholas,
jestingly, allowing his brother to enjoy the scent of his good cigar.
As the reply, which he did not want, was not forthcoming, he went on:

"Coming to you? Haven't you received everything due to you? Haven't you
yourself receipted the account for the Court of Wards? Haven't I kept
and clothed you since--to be strictly correct, haven't I made you a
loan, according to your own wish, to be paid back when you are able to
do so? I've put it all down, in readiness for the day when you will be
earning your livelihood, a thing which you've not done yet."

"I'm going to do it now, and that's why I'm here. I wanted to know
whether there's still anything owing to me, or whether I am in debt."

The brother cast a penetrating look at his victim, wondering whether he
had any mental reservations. His creaking boots began stamping the
floor on a diagonal line between spittoon and umbrella-stand; the
trinkets on his watch-chain tinkled, a warning to people not to cross
his way; the smoke of his cigar rose and lay in long, ominous clouds,
portentous of a thunderstorm, between tiled stove and door. He paced up
and down the room furiously, his head bowed, his shoulders rounded, as
if he were rehearsing a part. When he thought he knew it, he stopped
short before his brother, gazed into his eyes with a long, glinting,
deceitful look, intended to express both confidence and sorrow, and
said, in a voice meant to sound as if it came from the family grave in
the churchyard of St. Clara's:

"You're not straight, Arvid; you're not straight."

Who, with the exception of Andersson, who was standing behind the door,
listening, would not have been touched by those words, spoken by a
brother to a brother, fraught with the deepest brotherly sorrow? Even
Arvid, accustomed from his childhood to believe all men perfect and
himself alone unworthy, wondered for a moment whether he was straight
or not? And as his education, by efficacious means, had provided him
with a highly sensitive conscience, he found that he really had not
been quite straight, or at least quite frank, when he asked his brother
the not-altogether candid question as to whether he wasn't a scoundrel.

"I've come to the conclusion," he said, "that you cheated me out of a
part of my inheritance; I've calculated that you charged too much for
your inferior board and your cast-off clothes; I know that I didn't
spend all my fortune during my terrible college days, and I believe
that you owe me a fairly big sum; I want it now, and I request you to
hand it over to me."

A smile illuminated the brother's fair face, and with an expression so
calm and a gesture so steady, that he might have been rehearsing them
for years, so as to be in readiness when his cue was given to him, he
put his hand in his trousers pocket, rattled his bunch of keys before
taking it out, threw it up and dexterously caught it again, and walked
solemnly to his safe. He opened it more quickly than he intended and,
perhaps, than the sacredness of the spot justified, took out a paper
lying ready to his hand and evidently also waiting for its cue, and
handed it to his brother.

"Did you write this? Answer me! Did you write it?"

"Yes!"

Arvid rose and turned towards the door.

"Don't go! Sit down! Sit down!"

If a dog had been present it would have sat down at once.

"What's written here? Read it! 'I, Arvid Falk, acknowledge and
testify--that--I--have received from my brother, Charles Nicholas
Falk--who was appointed my guardian--my inheritance in full--amounting
to--' and so on." He was ashamed to mention the sum.

"You have acknowledged and testified a fact which you did not believe.
Is that straight? No, answer my question! Is that straight? No!
Therefore you have borne false witness. Ergo--you're a blackguard! Yes,
that's what you are! Am I right?"

The part was too excellent and the triumph too great to be enjoyed
without an audience. The innocently accused must have witnesses. He
opened the door leading into the shop.

"Andersson!" he shouted, "answer this question! Listen to me! If I bear
false witness, am I a blackguard or not?"

"Of course, you are a blackguard, sir!" Andersson answered
unhesitatingly and with warmth.

"Do you hear? He says I'm a blackguard--if I put my signature to a
false receipt. What did I say? You're not straight, Arvid, you are not
straight. Good-natured people often are blackguards; you have always
been good-natured and yielding, but I've always been aware that in your
secret heart you harboured very different thoughts; you're a
blackguard! Your father always said so; I say 'said,' for he always
said what he thought, and he was a straight man, Arvid, and
that--you--are--not! And you may be sure that if he were still alive he
would say with grief and pain: 'You're not straight, Arvid,
you--are--not--straight!'"

He did a few more diagonal lines and it sounded as if he were
applauding the scene with his feet; he rattled his bunch of keys as if
he were giving the signal for the curtain to rise. His closing remarks
had been so rounded off that the smallest addition would have spoilt
the whole. In spite of the heavy charge which he had actually expected
for years--for he had always believed his brother to be acting a
part--he was very glad that it was over, happily over, well and
cleverly over, so that he felt almost gay and even a little grateful.
Moreover he had had a splendid chance of venting the wrath which had
been kindled upstairs, in his family, on some one; to vent it on
Andersson had lost its charm; and he knew better than to vent it on his
wife.

Arvid was silent; the education he had received had so intimidated him
that he always believed himself to be in the wrong; since his childhood
the great words "upright, honest, sincere, true," had daily and hourly
been drummed into his ears, so that they stood before him like a judge,
continuously saying: "Guilty...." For a moment he thought that he must
have been mistaken in his calculations, that his brother must be
innocent and he himself a scoundrel; but immediately after he realized
that his brother was a cheat, deceiving him by a simple lawyer's trick.
He felt prompted to run away, fearful of being drawn into a quarrel, to
run away without making his request number two, and confessing that he
was on the point of changing his profession.

There was a long pause. Charles Nicholas had plenty of time to
recapitulate his triumph in his memory. That little word "blackguard"
had done his tongue good. It had been as pleasant as if he had said
"Get out!" And the opening of the door, Andersson's reply, and the
production of the paper, everything had passed off splendidly; he had
not forgotten the bunch of keys on his night-table; he had turned the
key in the lock without any difficulty; his proof was binding as a
rope, the conclusion he had drawn had been the baited hook by which the
fish had been caught.

He had regained his good temper; he had forgiven, nay, he had
forgotten, and as he slammed the door of the safe, he shut away the
disagreeable story for ever.

But he did not want to part from his brother in this mood; he wanted to
talk to him on other subjects; throw a few shovelfuls of gossip on the
unpleasant affair, see him under commonplace circumstances, sitting at
his table, for instance--and why not eating and drinking? People always
looked happy and content when they were eating and drinking; he wanted
so see him happy and content. He wanted to see his face calm, listen to
his voice speaking without a tremor, and he resolved to ask him to
luncheon. But he felt puzzled how to lead up to it, find a suitable
bridge across the gulf. He searched his brain, but found nothing. He
searched his pockets and found--the match.

"Hang it all, you've never lit your cigar, old boy!" he exclaimed with
genuine, not feigned, warmth.

But the old boy had crushed his cigar during the conversation, so that
it would not draw.

"Look here! Take another!" and he pulled out his big leather case.

"Here! Take one of these! They are good ones!"

Arvid, who, unfortunately, could not bear to hurt anybody's feelings,
accepted it gratefully, like a hand offered in reconciliation.

"Now, old boy," continued Charles Nicholas, talking lightly and
pleasantly, an accomplishment at which he was an expert. "Let's go to
the nearest restaurant and have lunch. Come along!"

Arvid, unused to friendliness, was so touched by these advances that he
hastily pressed his brother's hand and hurried away through the shop
without taking any notice of Andersson, and out into the street.

The brother felt embarrassed; he could not understand it. To run away
when he had been asked to lunch! To run away when he was not in the
least angry with him! To run away! No dog would have run away if a
piece of meat had been thrown to him!

"He's a queer chap!" he muttered, stamping the floor. Then he went to
his desk, screwed up the seat of his chair as high as it would go and
climbed up. From this raised position he was in the habit of
contemplating men and circumstances as from a higher point of view, and
he found them small; yet not so small that he could not use them for
his purposes.




CHAPTER III

THE ARTISTS' COLONY


It was between eight and nine o'clock on the same beautiful May
morning. Arvid Falk, after the scene with his brother, was strolling
through the streets, dissatisfied with himself, his brother, and the
whole world. He would have preferred to see the sky overcast, to be in
bad company. He did not believe that he was a blackguard, but he was
disappointed with the part he had played; he was accustomed to be
severe on himself, and it had always been drummed into him that his
brother was a kind of stepfather to whom he owed great respect, not to
say reverence. But he was worried and depressed by other thoughts as
well. He had neither money nor prospect of work. The last contingency
was, perhaps, the worse of the two, for to him, with his exuberant
imagination, idleness was a dangerous enemy.

Brooding over these disagreeable facts, he had reached Little Garden
Street; he sauntered along, on the left pavement, passed the Dramatic
Theatre, and soon reached High Street North. He walked on aimlessly;
the pavement became uneven; wooden cottages took the place of the stone
houses; badly dressed men and women were throwing suspicious glances at
the well-dressed stranger who was visiting their quarter at such an
early hour; famished dogs growled threateningly at him. He hastened
past groups of gunners, labourers, brewers' men, laundresses, and
apprentices, and finally came to Great Hop-Garden Street. He entered
the Hop-Garden. The cows belonging to the Inspector-General of
Ordnance were grazing in the fields; the old, bare apple trees were
making the first efforts to put forth buds; but the lime trees were
already in leaf and squirrels were playing up and down the branches. He
passed the merry-go-round and came to the avenue leading to the
theatre; here he met some truant schoolboys engaged in a game of
buttons; a little further a painter's apprentice was lying in the grass
on his back staring at the clouds through the dome of foliage; he was
whistling carelessly, indifferent to the fact that master and men were
waiting for him, while flies and other insects drowned themselves in
his paint-pots.

Falk had walked to the top of the hill and had come to the duck-pond;
he stood still for a while, studying the metamorphoses of the frogs;
watching the leeches; catching a water-spider. Then he began to throw
stones. The exercise brought his blood into circulation; he felt
rejuvenated, a schoolboy playing truant, free, defiantly free! It was
freedom bought by great self-sacrifice. The thought of being able to
commune with nature freely and at will, made him glad; he understood
nature better than men who had only ill-treated and slandered him; his
unrest disappeared; he rose and continued his way further into the
country.

Walking through the Cross, he came into Hop-Garden Street North. Some
of the boards were missing in the fence facing him, and there was a
very plainly marked footpath on the other side. He crept through the
hole, disturbing an old woman who was gathering nettles, crossed the
large tobacco field where a colony of villas has now sprung up, and
found himself at the gate of "Lill-Jans."

There was no doubt of its being spring in the little settlement,
consisting of three cottages snugly nestling among elders and apple
trees, and sheltered from the north wind by the pine-wood on the other
side of the High Road. The visitor was regaled with a perfect little
idyll. A cock, perched on the shafts of a watercart, was basking in
the sun and catching flies, the bees hung in a cloud round the
bee-hives, the gardener was kneeling by the hot-beds, sorting radishes;
the warblers and brand-tails were singing in the gooseberry bushes,
while lightly clad children chased the fowls bent on examining the
germinative capacity of various newly sown seeds. A brilliant blue sky
spanned the scene and the dark forest framed the background.

Two men were sitting close to the hot-beds, in the shelter of the
fence. One of them, wearing a tall, black hat and a threadbare, black
suit, had a long, narrow, pale face, and looked like a clergyman. With
his stout but deformed body, drooping eyelids, and Mongolian moustache,
the other one belonged to the type of civilized peasant. He was very
badly dressed and might have been many things: a vagabond, an artisan,
or an artist; he looked seedy, but seedy in an original way.

The lean man, who obviously felt chilly, although he sat right in the
sun, was reading to his friend from a book; the latter looked as though
he had tried all the climates of the earth and was able to stand them
all equally well.

As Falk entered the garden gate from the high road, he could distinctly
hear the reader's words through the fence, and he thought it no breach
of confidence to stand still for a while and listen.

The lean man was reading in a dry, monotonous voice, a voice without
resonance, and his stout friend every now and then acknowledged his
appreciation by a snort which changed occasionally into a grunt and
became a splutter whenever the words of wisdom to which he was
listening surpassed ordinary human understanding.

"'The highest principles are, as already stated, three; one, absolutely
unconditioned, and two, relatively unconditioned ones. _Pro primo_: the
absolutely first, purely unconditioned principle, would express the
action underlying all consciousness and without which consciousness
cannot exist. This principle is the identity A--A. It endures and
cannot be disposed of by thought when all empirical definitions of
consciousness are prescinded. It is the original fact of consciousness
and must therefore, of necessity, be acknowledged. Moreover, it is not
conditioned like every other empirical fact, but as consequence and
substance of a voluntary act entirely unconditioned.'"

"Do you follow, Olle?" asked the reader, interrupting himself.

"It's amazing! It is not conditioned like every other empirical fact.
Oh! What a man! Go on! Go on!"

"'If it is maintained,'" continued the reader, "'that this proposition
without any further proof be true....'"

"Oh! I say! What a rascal! without any further proof be true," repeated
the grateful listener, bent on dissipating all suspicion that he had
not grasped what had been read, "without any _further_ reason, how
subtle, how subtle of him to say that instead of simply saying 'without
any reason.'"

"Am I to continue? Or do you intend to go on interrupting me?" asked
the offended reader.

"I won't interrupt again. Go on! Go on!"

"Well, now he draws the conclusion (really excellent): 'If one ascribes
to oneself the ability to state a proposition----'"

Olle snorted.

"'One does not propose thereby A (capital A), but merely that A--A, if
and in so far as A exists at all. It is not a question of the essence
of an assertion but only of its form. The proposition A--A is therefore
conditioned (hypothetically) as far as its essence is concerned, and
unconditioned only as far as its form goes.'

"Have you noticed the capital A?"

Falk had heard enough; this was the terribly profound philosophy of
Upsala, which had strayed to Stockholm to conquer and subdue the
coarse instincts of the capital. He looked at the fowls to see whether
they had not tumbled off their roosts; at the parsley whether it had
not stopped growing while made to listen to the profoundest wisdom ever
proclaimed by human voice at Lill-Jans; he was surprised to find that
the sky had not fallen after witnessing such a feat of mental strength.
At the same time his base human nature clamoured for attention: his
throat was parched, and he decided to ask for a glass of water at one
of the cottages.

Turning back he strolled towards the hut on the right-hand side of the
road, coming from town. The door leading into a large room--once a
bakery--from an entrance-hall the size of a travelling trunk, stood
open. The room contained a bed-sofa, a broken chair, an easel, and two
men. One of them, wearing only a shirt and a pair of trousers kept up
by a leather belt, was standing before the easel. He looked like a
journeyman, but he was an artist making a sketch for an altar-piece.
The other man was a youth with clear-cut features and, considering his
environment, well-made clothes. He had taken off his coat, turned back
his shirt and was serving as the artist's model. His handsome, noble
face showed traces of a night of dissipation, and every now and then he
dozed, each time reprimanded by the master who seemed to have taken him
under his protection. As Falk was entering the room he heard the burden
of one of these reprimands:

"That you should make such a hog of yourself and spend the night
drinking with that loafer Sellén, and now be standing here wasting your
time instead of being at the Commercial School! The right shoulder a
little higher, please; that's better! Is it true that you've spent all
the money for your rent and daren't go home? Have you nothing left? Not
one farthing?"

"I still have some, but it won't go far." The young man pulled a scrap
of paper out of his trousers pocket, and straightening it out, produced
two notes for a crown each.

"Give them to me, I'll take care of them for you," exclaimed the
master, seizing them with fatherly solicitude.

Falk, who had vainly tried to attract their attention, thought it best
to depart as quietly as he had come. Once more passing the manure heap
and the two philosophers, he turned to the left. He had not gone far
when he caught sight of a young man who had put up his easel at the
edge of a little bog planted with alder trees, close to the wood. He
had a graceful, slight, almost elegant figure, and a thin, dark face.
He seemed to scintillate life as he stood before his easel, working at
a fine picture. He had taken off his coat and hat and appeared to be in
excellent health and spirits; alternately talking to himself and
whistling or humming snatches of song.

When Falk was near enough to have him in profile he turned round.

"Sellén! Good morning, old chap!"

"Falk! Fancy meeting you out here in the wood! What the deuce does it,
mean? Oughtn't you to be at your office at this time of day?"

"No! But are you living out here?"

"Yes; I came here on the first of April with some pals. Found life in
town too expensive--and, moreover, landlords are so particular."

A sly smile played about one of the corners of his mouth and his brown
eyes flashed.

"I see," Falk began again; "then perhaps you know the two individuals
who were sitting by the hot-beds just now, reading?"

"The philosophers? Of course, I do! The tall one is an assistant at the
Public Sales Office at a salary of eighty crowns per annum, and the
short one, Olle Montanus, ought to be at home at his sculpture--but
since he and Ygberg have taken up philosophy, he has left off working
and is fast going down hill. He has discovered that there is something
sensual in art."

"What's he living on?"

"On nothing at all! Occasionally he sits to the practical Lundell and
then he gets a piece of black pudding. This lasts him for about a day.
In the winter Lundell lets him lie on his floor; 'he helps to warm the
room,' he says, and wood is very dear; it was very cold here in April."

"How can he be a model? He looks such a God-help-me sort of chap."

"He poses for one of the thieves in Lundell's "Descent from the Cross,"
the one whose bones are already broken; the poor devil's suffering from
hip disease; he does splendidly when he leans across the back of a
chair; sometimes the artist makes him turn his back to him; then he
represents the other thief."

"But why doesn't he work himself? Has he no talent?"

"Olle Montanus, my dear fellow, is a genius, but he won't work. He's a
philosopher and would have become a great man if he could have gone to
college. It's really extraordinary to listen to him and Ygberg talking
philosophy; it's true, Ygberg has read more, but in spite of that
Montanus, with his subtle brain, succeeds in cornering him every now
and again; then Ygberg goes away and reads some more, but he never
lends the book to Montanus."

"I see! And you like Ygberg's philosophy?" asked Falk.

"Oh! It's subtle, wonderfully subtle! You like Fichte, don't you? I
say! What a man!"

"Who were the two individuals in the cottage?" asked Falk, who did not
like Fichte.

"Oh. You saw them too? One of them was the practical Lundell, a painter
of figures, or rather, sacred subjects; the other one was my friend
Rehnhjelm."

He pronounced the last few words with the utmost indifference, so as
to heighten their effect as much as possible.

"Rehnhjelm?"

"Yes; a very nice fellow."

"He was acting as Lundell's model."

"Was he? That's like Lundell! He knows how to make use of people; he is
extraordinarily practical. But come along, let's worry him; it's the
only fun I have out here. Then, perhaps, you'll hear Montanus speaking,
and that's really worth while."

Less for the sake of hearing Montanus speaking than for the sake of
obtaining a glass of water, Falk followed Sellén, helping him to carry
easel and paintbox.

The scene in the cottage was slightly changed; the model was now
sitting on the broken chair, and Montanus and Ygberg on the bed-sofa.
Lundell was standing at his easel, smoking; his seedy friends watched
him and his old, snoring cherry-wood pipe; the very presence of a pipe
and tobacco raised their spirits.

Falk was introduced and immediately Lundell monopolized him, asking him
for his opinion of the picture he was painting. It was a Rubens, at
least as far as the subject went, though anything but a Rubens in
colour and drawing. Thereupon Lundell dilated on the hard times and
difficulties of an artist, severely criticized the Academy, and
censured the Government for neglecting native art. He was engaged in
sketching an altar-piece, although he was convinced that it would be
refused, for nobody could succeed without intrigues and connexions. And
he scrutinized Falk's clothes, wondering whether _he_ might be a useful
connexion.

Falk's appearance had produced a different effect on the two
philosophers. They scented a man of letters in him, and hated him
because he might rob them of the reputation they enjoyed in the small
circle. They exchanged significant glances, immediately understood by
Sellén, who found it impossible to resist the temptation of showing off
his friends in their glory, and, if possible, bring about an
encounter. He soon found an apple of discord, aimed, threw, and hit.

"What do you say to Lundell's picture, Ygberg?"

Ygberg, not expecting to be called upon to speak so soon, had to
consider his answer for a few seconds. Then he made his reply, raising
his voice, while Olle rubbed his back to make him hold himself
straight.

"A work of art may, in my opinion, be divided into two categories:
subject and form. With regard to the subject in this work of art there
is no denying that it is profound and universally human; the motive,
properly speaking, is in itself fertile, and contains all the
potentialities of artistic work. With regard to the form which of
itself shall _de facto_ manifest the idea, that is to say the absolute
identity, the being, the ego--I cannot help saying that I find it less
adequate."

Lundell was obviously flattered. Olle smiled his sunniest smile as if
he were contemplating the heavenly hosts; the model was asleep and
Sellén found that Ygberg had scored a complete success. All eyes were
turned on Falk who was compelled to take up the gauntlet, for no one
doubted that Ygberg's criticism was a challenge.

Falk was both amused and annoyed. He was searching the limbo of memory
for philosophical air-guns, when he caught sight of Olle Montanus,
whose convulsed face betrayed his desire to speak. Falk loaded his gun
at random with Aristotle and fired.

"What do you mean by adequate? I cannot recollect that Aristotle made
use of that word in his Metaphysics."

Absolute silence fell on the room; everybody felt that a fight between
the artist's colony and the University of Upsala was imminent. The
interval was longer than was desirable, for Ygberg was unacquainted
with Aristotle and would have died sooner than have admitted it. As he
was not quick at repartee, he failed to discover the breach which Falk
had left open; but Olle did, caught Aristotle with both hands and flung
him back at his opponent.

"Although I'm not a learned man, I venture to question whether you, Mr.
Falk, have upset your opponent's argument? In my opinion _adequate_ may
be used and accepted as a definition in a logical conclusion, in spite
of Aristotle not having mentioned the word in his Metaphysics. Am I
right, gentlemen? I don't know, I'm not a learned man and Mr. Falk has
made a study of these things."

He had spoken with half-closed eyelids; now he closed them entirely and
looked impudently shy.

There was a general murmur of "Olle is right."

Falk realized that this was a matter to be handled without mittens, if
the honour of Upsala was to be safeguarded; he made a pass with the
philosophical pack of cards and threw up an ace.

"Mr. Montanus has denied the antecedent or said simply: _nego majorem!_
Very well! I, on my part, declare that he has been guilty of a
_posterius prius_; when he found himself on the horns of a dilemma he
went astray and made a syllogism after _ferioque_ instead of _barbara_.
He has forgotten the golden rule: _Cæsare camestres festino baroco
secundo_; and therefore his conclusion became weakened. Am I right
gentlemen?"

"Quite right, absolutely right," replied everybody, except the two
philosophers who had never held a book of logic in their hands.

Ygberg looked as if he had bitten on a nail, and Olle grinned as if a
handful of snuff had been thrown into his eyes; but his native
shrewdness had discovered the tactical method of his opponent. He
resolved not to stick to the point, but to talk of something else. He
brought out everything he had learned and everything he had heard,
beginning with the Criticism of Fichte's Philosophy to which Falk had
been listening a little while ago from behind the fence. The
discussion went on until the morning was nearly spent.

In the meantime Lundell went on painting, his foul pipe snoring loudly.
The model had fallen asleep on the broken chair, his head sinking
deeper and deeper until, about noon, it hung between his knees; a
mathematician could have calculated the time when it would reach the
centre of the earth.

Sellén was sitting at the open window enjoying himself; but poor Falk,
who had been under the impression that this terrible philosophy was a
thing of the past, was compelled to continue throwing fistfuls of
philosophic snuff into the eyes of his antagonists. The torture would
never have come to an end if the model's centre of gravity had not
gradually shifted to one of the most delicate parts of the chair; it
gave way and the Baron fell on the floor. Lundell seized the
opportunity to inveigh against the vice of drunkenness and its
miserable consequences for the victim as well as for others; by others
he meant, of course, himself.

Falk, anxious to come to the assistance of the embarrassed youth,
eagerly asked a question bound to be of general interest.

"Where are the gentlemen going to dine?"

The room grew silent, so silent that the buzzing of the flies was
plainly audible; Falk was quite unconscious of the fact that he had
stepped on five corns at one and the same moment. It was Lundell who
broke the silence. He and Rehnhjelm were going to dine at the
"Sauce-Pan," their usual restaurant, for they had credit there; Sellén
objected to the place because he did not like the cooking, and had not
yet decided on another establishment; he looked at the model with an
anxious, inquiring glance. Ygberg and Montanus were too "busy" and "not
going to cut up their working-day" by "dressing and going up to town."
They were going to get something out here, but they did not say what.

A general dressing began, principally consisting of a wash at the old
garden-pump. Sellén, who was a dandy, had hidden a parcel wrapped in a
newspaper underneath the bed-sofa, from which he produced collar, cuffs
and shirt-front, made of paper. He knelt for a long time before the
pump, gazing into the trough, while he put on a brownish-green tie, a
present from a lady, and arranged his hair in a particular style.

When he had rubbed his shoes with a bur leaf, brushed his hat with his
coat sleeve, put a grape-hyacinth in his buttonhole and seized his
cinnamon cane, he was ready to go. To his question whether Rehnhjelm
would be ready soon, Lundell replied that he would be hours yet, as he
required his assistance in drawing; Lundell always devoted the time
from twelve to two to drawing. Rehnhjelm submitted and obeyed, although
he found it hard to part with Sellén, of whom he was fond, and stay
with Lundell whom he disliked.

"We shall meet to-night at the Red Room," said Sellén, comforting him,
and all agreed, even the philosophers and the moral Lundell.

On their way to town Sellén initiated his friend Falk into some of the
secrets of the colonists. As for himself, he had broken with the
Academy, because his views on art differed from theirs; he knew that he
had talent and would eventually be successful, although success might
be long in coming. It was, of course, frightfully difficult to make a
name without the Royal Medal. There were also natural obstacles in his
way. He was a native of the barren coast of Halland and loved grandeur
and simplicity; but critics and public demanded detail and trifles;
therefore his pictures did not sell; he could have painted what
everybody else painted, but he scorned to do so.

Lundell, on the other hand, was a practical man--Sellén always
pronounced the word _practical_ with a certain contempt--he painted to
please the public. He never suffered from indisposition; it was true
he had left the Academy, but for secret, practical reasons; moreover,
in spite of his assertion, he had not broken with it entirely. He made
a good income out of his illustrations for magazines and, although he
had little talent, he was bound to make his fortune some day, not only
because of the number of his connexions, but also because of his
intrigues. It was Montanus who had put him up to those; he was the
originator of more than one plan which Lundell had successfully carried
out. Montanus was a genius, although he was terribly unpractical.

Rehnhjelm was a native of Norrland. His father had been a wealthy man;
he had owned a large estate which was now the property of his former
inspector. The old aristocrat was comparatively poor; he hoped that his
son would learn a lesson from the past, take an inspector's post and
eventually restore the family to its former position by the acquisition
of a new estate. Buoyed up with this hope, he had sent him to the
Commercial School to study agricultural book-keeping, an accomplishment
which the youth detested. He was a good fellow but a little weak, and
allowing himself to be influenced by Lundell, who did not scorn to take
the fee for his preaching and patronage in natura.

In the meantime Lundell and the Baron had started work; the Baron was
drawing, while the master lay on the sofa, supervising the work, in
other words, smoking.

"If you'll put your back into your work, you shall come to dinner with
me at the 'Brass-Button,'" promised Lundell, feeling rich with the two
crowns which he had saved from destruction.

Ygberg and Montanus had sauntered up the wooded eminence, intending to
sleep away the dinner hour; Olle beamed after his victories, but Ygberg
was depressed; his pupil had surpassed him. Moreover, his feet were
cold and he was unusually hungry, for the eager discussion of dinner
had awakened in him slumbering feelings successfully suppressed for
the last twelve months. They threw themselves under a pine tree;
Ygberg hid the precious, carefully wrapped up book, which he always
refused to lend to Olle, under his head, and stretched himself
full-length on the ground; he looked deadly pale, cold and calm like a
corpse which has abandoned all hope of resurrection. He watched some
little birds above his head picking at the pine seed and letting the
husks fall down on him; he watched a cow, the picture of robust health,
grazing among the alders; he saw the smoke rising from the gardener's
kitchen chimney.

"Are you hungry, Olle?" he asked in a feeble voice.

"No!" replied Olle, casting covetous looks at the wonderful book.

"Oh! to be a cow!" sighed Ygberg, crossing his hands on his chest and
giving himself up to all-merciful sleep.

When his low breathing had become regular, the waking friend gently
pulled the book from its hiding-place, without disturbing the sleeper;
then he turned over and lying on his stomach he began to devour the
precious contents, forgetting all about the "Sauce-Pan" and the
"Brass-Button."




CHAPTER IV

MASTER AND DOGS


Two or three days had passed. Mrs. Charles Nicholas Falk, a lady of
twenty-two years of age, had just finished her breakfast in bed, the
colossal mahogany bed in the large bedroom. It was only ten o'clock.
Her husband had been away since seven, taking up flax on the shore. But
the young wife had not stayed in bed--a thing she knew to be contrary
to the rules of the house--because she counted on his absence. She had
only been married for two years, but during that period she had found
abundant time to introduce sweeping reforms in the old, conservative,
middle-class household, where everything was old, even the servants. He
had invested her with the necessary power on the day on which he had
confessed his love to her, and she had graciously consented to become
his wife, that is to say, permitted him to deliver her from the hated
bondage of her parental roof, where she had been compelled to get up
every morning at six o'clock and work all day long. She had made good
use of the period of her engagement, for it was then that she had
collected a number of guarantees, promising her a free and independent
life, unmolested by any interference on the part of her husband. Of
course these guarantees consisted merely of verbal assurances made by a
love-sick man, but she, who had never allowed her emotion to get the
better of her, had carefully noted them down on the tablets of her
memory. After two years of matrimony, unredeemed by the promise of a
child, the husband showed a decided inclination to set aside all these
guarantees, and question her right to sleep as long as she liked, for
instance, to have breakfast in bed, etcetera, etcetera; he had even
been so indelicate as to remind her that he had pulled her out of the
mire; had delivered her from a hell, thereby sacrificing himself. The
marriage had been a misalliance, her father being one of the crew of
the flagship.

As she lay there she was concocting replies to these and similar
reproaches; and as her common sense during the long period of their
mutual acquaintance had never been clouded by any intoxication of the
senses, she had it well in hand and knew how to use it. The sounds of
her husband's return filled her with unalloyed pleasure. Presently the
dining-room door was slammed; a tremendous bellowing became audible;
she pushed her head underneath the bed-clothes to smother her laughter.
Heavy footsteps crossed the adjacent room and the angry husband
appeared on the threshold, hat on head. His wife, who was turning her
back to him, called out in her most dulcet tones:

"Is that you, little lubber? Come in, come in!"

The little lubber--this was a pet name, and husband and wife frequently
used others, even more original ones--showed no inclination to accept
her invitation, but remained standing in the doorway and shouted:

"Why isn't the table laid for lunch?"

"Ask the girls; it isn't my business to lay the table! But it's
customary to take off one's hat on coming into a room, sir!"

"What have you done with my cap?"

"Burnt it! It was so greasy, you ought to have been ashamed to wear
it."

"You burnt it? We'll talk about that later on! Why are you lying in bed
until all hours of the morning, instead of supervising the girls?"

"Because I like it."

"Do you think I married a wife to have her refusing to look after her
house? What?"

"You did! But why do you think I married you? I've told you a thousand
times--so that I shouldn't have to work--and you promised me I
shouldn't. Didn't you? Can you swear, on your word of honour, that you
did _not_ promise? That's the kind of man you are! You are just like
all the rest!"

"It was long ago!"

"Long ago? When was long ago? Is a promise not binding for all times?
Or must it be made in any particular season?"

The husband knew this unanswerable logic only too well, and his wife's
good temper had the same effect as her tears--he gave in.

"I'm going to have visitors to-night," he stated.

"Oh, indeed! Gentlemen?"

"Of course! I detest women."

"Well, I suppose you've ordered what you want?"

"No, I want you to do that."

"I? I've no money for entertaining. I shall certainly not spend my
housekeeping money on your visitors."

"No, you prefer spending it on dress and other useless things."

"Do you call the things I make for you useless? Is a smoking-cap
useless? Are slippers useless? Tell me! Tell me candidly!"

She was an adept in formulating her questions in such a way that the
reply was bound to be crushing for the person who had to answer them.
She was merely copying her husband's method. If he wanted to avoid
being crushed, he was compelled to keep changing the subject of
conversation.

"But I really have a very good reason for entertaining a few guests
to-night," he said with a show of emotion; "my old friend, Fritz Levin,
of the Post Office, has been promoted after nineteen years' service--I
read it in the Postal Gazette last night. But as you disapprove, and as
I always give way to you, I shall let the matter drop, and shall merely
ask Levin and schoolmaster Nyström to a little supper in the
counting-house."

"So that loafer Levin has been promoted? I never! Perhaps now he'll pay
you back all the money he owes you?"

"I hope so!"

"I can't understand how on earth you can have anything to do with that
man! And the schoolmaster! Beggars, both of them, who hardly own the
clothes they wear."

"I say, old girl, I never interfere in your affairs; leave my business
alone."

"If you have guests downstairs, I don't see why I shouldn't have
friends up here!"

"Well, why don't you?"

"All right, little lubber, give me some money then."

The little lubber, in every respect pleased with the turn matters had
taken, obeyed with pleasure.

"How much? I've very little cash to-day."

"Oh! Fifty'll do."

"Are you mad?"

"Mad? Give me what I ask for. Why should I starve when you feast?"

Peace was established and the parties separated with mutual
satisfaction. There was no need for him to lunch badly at home; he was
compelled to go out; no necessity to eat a poor dinner and be made
uncomfortable by the presence of ladies; he was embarrassed in the
company of women, for he had been a bachelor too long; no reason to be
troubled by his conscience, for his wife would not be alone at home; as
it happened she wanted to invite her own friends and be rid of him--it
was worth fifty crowns.

As soon as her husband had gone, Mrs. Falk rang the bell; she had
stayed in bed all the morning to punish the housemaid, for the girl had
remarked that in the old days everybody used to be up at seven. She
asked for paper and ink and scribbled a note to Mrs. Homan, the
controller's wife, who lived in the house opposite.

    DEAR EVELYN--the letter ran:

    Come in this evening and have a cup of tea with me; we can then
    discuss the statutes of the "Association for the Rights of Women."
    Possibly a bazaar or amateur theatricals would help us on. I am
    longing to set the association going; it is an urgent need, as you
    so often said; I feel it very deeply when I think about it. Do you
    think that her Ladyship would honour my house at the same time?
    Perhaps I ought to call on her first. Come and fetch me at twelve
    and we'll have a cup of chocolate at a confectioner's. My husband
    is away.
                                           Yours affectionately,
                                                            EUGENIA.

    P.S. My husband is away.

When she had despatched the letter, she got up and dressed, so as to be
ready at twelve.

      *       *       *       *       *

It was evening.

The eastern end of Long Street was already plunged in twilight, when
the clock of the German church struck seven; only a faint ray of light
from Pig Street fell into Falk's flax-shop, as Andersson made ready to
close it for the night. The shutters in the counting-house had already
been fastened and the gas was lighted. The place had been swept and
straightened; two hampers with protruding necks of bottles, sealed red
and yellow, some covered with tinfoil and others wrapped in pink tissue
paper, were standing close to the door. The centre of the room was
taken up by a table covered with a white cloth; on it stood an Indian
bowl and a heavy silver candelabrum.

Nicholas Falk paced up and down. He was wearing a black frock-coat, and
had a respectable as well as a festive air. He had a right to look
forward to a pleasant evening: he had arranged it; he had paid for it;
he was in his own house and at his ease, for there were no ladies
present, and his invited guests were of a calibre which justified him
in expecting from them not only attention and civility, but a little
more.

They were only two, but he did not like many people; they were his
friends, reliable, devoted as dogs; submissive, agreeable, always
flattering and never contradicting him.

Being a man of means, he could have moved in better circles; he might
have associated with his father's friends, and he did so, twice a year;
but he was of too despotic a nature to get on with them.

It was three minutes past seven and still the guests had not arrived.
Falk began to show signs of impatience. When he invited his henchmen,
he expected them to be punctual to the minute. The thought of the
unusually sumptuous arrangement, however, and the paralysing impression
it was bound to make, helped him to control his temper a little longer;
at the lapse of a few more moments Fritz Levin, the post-office
official put in an appearance.

"Good-evening, brother--oh! I say!" He paused in the action of
divesting himself of his overcoat, and feigned surprise at the
magnificent preparations; he almost seemed in danger of falling on his
back with sheer amazement. "The seven-armed candle-stick, and the
tabernacle! Good Lord!" he ejaculated, catching sight of the hampers.

The individual who delivered these well-rehearsed witticisms while
taking off his overcoat, was a middle-aged man of the type of the
government official of twenty years ago; his whiskers joined his
moustache, his hair was parted at the side and arranged in a _coup de
vent_. He was extremely pale and as thin as a shroud. In spite of being
well dressed, he was shivering with cold and seemed to have secret
traffic with poverty.

Falk's manner in welcoming him was both rude and patronizing; it was
partly intended to express his scorn of flattery, more particularly
from an individual like the newcomer, and partly to intimate that the
newcomer enjoyed the privilege of his friendship.

By way of congratulation he began to draw a parallel between Levin's
promotion and his own father's receiving a commission in the militia.

"Well, it's a grand thing to have the royal mandate in one's pocket,
isn't it? My father, too, received a royal mandate...."

"Pardon me, dear brother, but I've only been appointed."

"Appointed or royal mandate, it comes to the same thing. Don't teach
me! My father, too, had a royal mandate...."

"I assure you...."

"Assure me--what d'you mean by that? D'you mean to imply that I'm
standing here telling lies? Tell me, do you mean to say that I'm
lying?"

"Of course I don't! There's no need to lose your temper like that!"

"Very well! You're admitting that I'm not telling lies, consequently
you have a royal mandate. Why do you talk such nonsense? My father...."

The pale man, in whose wake a drove of furies seemed to have entered
the counting-house--for he trembled in every limb--now rushed at his
patron, firmly resolved to get over with his business before the feast
began, so that nothing should afterwards disturb the general enjoyment.

"Help me," he groaned, with the despair of a drowning man, taking a
bill out of his pocket.

Falk sat down on the sofa, shouted for Andersson, ordered him to open
the bottles and began to mix the bowl.

"Help you? Haven't I helped you before?" he replied. "Haven't you
borrowed from me again and again without paying me back? Answer me!
What have you got to say?"

"I know, brother, that you have always been kindness itself to me."

"And now you've been promoted, haven't you? Everything was to be all
right now; all debts were to be paid and a new life was to begin. I've
listened to this kind of talk for eighteen years. What salary do you
draw now?"

"Twelve hundred crowns instead of eight hundred as before. But now,
think of this: the cost of the mandate was one hundred and twenty-five;
the pension fund deducts fifty; that makes one hundred and
seventy-five. Where I am to take it from? But the worst of it all is
this: my creditors have seized half my salary; consequently I have now
only six hundred crowns to live on instead of eight hundred--and I've
waited nineteen years for that. Promotion is a splendid thing!"

"Why did you get into debt? One ought never to get into debt.
Never--get--into debt."

"With a salary of eight hundred crowns all these years! How was it
possible to keep out of it?"

"In that case you had no business to be in the employ of the
Government. But this is a matter which doesn't concern me;
doesn't--concern--me."

"Won't you sign once more? For the last time?"

"You know my principles; I never sign bills. Please let the matter
drop."

Levin, who was evidently used to these refusals, calmed down. At the
same moment schoolmaster Nyström entered, and, to the relief of both
parties, interrupted the conversation. He was a dried-up individual of
mysterious appearance and age. His occupation, too, was mysterious; he
was supposed to be a master at a school in one of the southern
suburbs--nobody ever asked which school and he did not care to talk
about it. His mission, so far as Falk was concerned, was first to be
addressed as schoolmaster when there were other people present;
secondly, to be polite and submissive; thirdly, to borrow a little
every now and then; never exceeding a fiver; it was one of Falk's
fundamental needs that people should borrow money from him
occasionally, only a little, of course; and, fourthly, to write verses
on festive occasions; and the latter was not the least of the component
parts of his mission.

Charles Nicholas Falk sat enthroned on his leather sofa, very conscious
of the fact that it was _his_ leather sofa, surrounded by his staff; or
his dogs, as one might have said. Levin found everything splendid; the
bowl, the glasses, the ladle, the cigars--the whole box had been taken
from the mantelpiece--the matches, the ash-trays, the bottles, the
corks, the wire--everything. The schoolmaster looked content; he was
not called upon to talk, the other two did that; he was merely required
to be present as a witness in case of need.

Falk was the first to raise his glass and drink--nobody knew to
whom--but the schoolmaster, believing it to be to the hero of the day,
produced his verses and began to read "To Fritz Levin on the Day of his
Promotion."

Falk was attacked by a violent cough which disturbed the reading and
spoiled the effect of the wittiest points; but Nyström, who was a
shrewd man and had foreseen this, had introduced into his poem the
finely felt and finely expressed reflection: "What would have become of
Fritz Levin if Charles Nicholas hadn't befriended him?" This subtle
hint at the numerous loans made by Falk to his friend, soothed the
cough; it subsided and ensured a better reception to the last verse
which was quite impudently dedicated to Levin, a tactlessness which
again threatened to disturb the harmony. Falk emptied his glass as if
he were draining a cup filled to the brim with ingratitude.

"You're not up to the mark, Nyström," he said.

"No, he was far wittier on your thirty-eighth birthday," agreed Levin,
guessing what Falk was driving at.

Falk's glance penetrated into the most hidden recesses of Levin's soul,
trying to discover whether any lie or fraud lay hidden there--and as
his eyes were blinded by pride, he saw nothing.

"Quite true," he acquiesced: "I never heard anything more witty in all
my life; it was good enough to be printed; you really ought to get your
things printed. I say, Nyström, surely you know it by heart, don't
you?"

Nyström had a shocking memory, or, to tell the truth, he had not yet
had enough wine to commit the suggested outrage against decency and
good form; he asked for time. But Falk, irritated by his quiet
resistance, had gone too far to turn back, and insisted on his request.
He was almost sure that he had a copy of the verses with him; he
searched his pocket-book and behold! There they lay. Modesty did not
forbid him to read them aloud himself; it would not have been for the
first time; but it sounded better for another to read them. The poor
dog bit his chain, but it held. He was a sensitive man, this
schoolmaster, but he had to be brutal if he did not want to relinquish
the precious gift of life, and he had been very brutal. The most
private affairs were fully and openly discussed, everything in
connexion with the birth of the hero, his reception into the community,
his education and up-bringing were made fun of; the verses would have
disgusted even Falk himself if they had treated of any other person,
but the fact of their celebrating him and his doings made them
excellent. When the recitation was over, his health was drunk
uproariously, in many glasses, for each member of the little party felt
that he was too sober to keep his real feelings under control.

The table was now cleared and an excellent supper consisting of
oysters, birds, and other good things, was served. Falk went sniffing
from dish to dish, sent one or two of them back, took care that the
chill was taken off the stout, and that the wines were the right
temperature. Now his dogs were called upon to do their work and offer
him a pleasant spectacle. When everybody was ready, he pulled out his
gold watch and held it in his hand while he jestingly asked a question
which his convives had heard many times--so very many times:

"What is the time by the silver watches of the gentlemen?"

The anticipated reply came as in duty bound, accompanied by gay
laughter: the watches were at the watch-maker's. This put Falk into the
best of tempers, which found expression in the not at all unexpected
joke:

"The animals will be fed at eight."

He sat down, poured out three liqueurs, took one and invited his
friends to follow his example.

"I must make a beginning myself, as you both seem to be holding back.
Don't let's stand on ceremony! Tuck in boys!"

The feeding began. Charles Nicholas who was not particularly hungry,
had plenty of time to enjoy the appetite of his guests, and he
continually urged them to eat. An unspeakably benevolent smile radiated
from his bright, sunny countenance as he watched their zeal, and it was
difficult to say what he enjoyed more, the fact of their having a good
meal, or the fact of their being so hungry. He sat there like a
coachman on his box, clicking his tongue and cracking his whip at them.

"Eat, Nyström! You don't know when you'll get a meal next. Help
yourself, Levin; you look as if you could do with a little flesh on
your bones. Are you grinning at the oysters? Aren't they good enough
for a fellow like you? What do you say? Take another! Don't be shy!
What do you say? You've had enough? Nonsense! Have a drink now! Take
some stout, boys! Now a little more salmon! You _shall_ take another
piece, by the Lord Harry, you shall! Go on eating! Why the devil don't
you? It costs you nothing!"

When the birds had been carved, Charles Nicholas poured out the claret
with a certain solemnity. The guests paused, anticipating a speech.
The host raised his glass, smelt the bouquet of the wine and said with
profound gravity:

"Your health, you hogs!"

Nyström responded by raising his glass and drinking; but Levin left his
untouched, looking as if he were secretly sharpening a knife.

When supper was over Levin, strengthened by food and drink, his senses
befogged by the fumes of the wine, began to nurse a feeling of
independence; a strong yearning for freedom stirred in his heart. His
voice grew more resonant; he pronounced his words with increasing
assurance, and his movements betrayed greater ease.

"Give me a cigar!" he said in a commanding tone; "no, not a weed like
these, a good one."

Charles Nicholas, regarding his words as a good joke, obeyed.

"Your brother isn't here to-night," remarked Levin casually. There was
something ominous and threatening in his voice; Falk felt it and became
uneasy.

"No!" he said shortly, but his voice was unsteady.

Levin waited for a few moments before striking a second blow. One of
his most lucrative occupations was his interference in other people's
business; he carried gossip from family to family; sowed a grain of
discord here and another there, merely to play the grateful part of the
mediator afterwards. In this way he had obtained a great deal of
influence, was feared by his acquaintances, and managed them as if they
were marionettes.

Falk felt this disagreeable influence and attempted to shake it off;
but in vain. Levin knew how to whet his curiosity; and by hinting at
more than he knew, he succeeded in bluffing people into betraying their
secrets.

At the present moment Levin held the whip and he promised himself to
make his oppressor feel it. He was still merely playing with it, but
Falk was waiting for the blow. He tried to change the subject of
conversation. He urged his friends to drink and they drank. Levin grew
whiter and colder as his intoxication increased, and went on playing
with his victim.

"Your wife has visitors this evening," he suddenly remarked.

"How do you know?" asked Falk, taken aback.

"I know everything," answered Levin, showing his teeth. It was almost
true; his widely extending business connexions compelled him to visit
as many public places as possible, and there he heard much; not only
the things which were spoken of in his society, but also those which
were discussed by others.

Falk was beginning to feel afraid without knowing why, and he thought
it best to divert the threatening danger. He became civil, humble even,
but Levin's boldness still increased. There was no alternative, he must
make a speech, remind his companions of the cause of the gathering,
acknowledge the hero of the day. There was no other escape. He was a
poor speaker, but the thing had to be done. He tapped against the bowl,
filled the glasses, and recollecting an old speech, made by his father
when Falk became his own master, he rose and began, very slowly:

"Gentlemen! I have been my own master these eight years; I was only
thirty years old...."

The change from a sitting position to a standing one caused a rush of
blood to his head; he became confused; Levin's mocking glances added to
his embarrassment. His confusion grew; the figure thirty seemed
something so colossal that it completely disconcerted him.

"Did I say thirty? I didn't--mean it. I was in my father's employ--for
many years. It would take too long to recount everything--I suffered
during those years; it's the common lot. Perhaps you think me
selfish...."

"Hear! hear!" groaned Nyström who was resting his heavy head on the
table.

Levin puffed the smoke of his cigar in the direction of the speaker, as
if he were spitting in his face.

Falk, really intoxicated now, continued his speech; his eyes seemed to
seek a distant goal without being able to find it.

"Everybody is selfish, we all know that. Ye-es! My father, who made a
speech when I became my own master, as I was just saying----"

He pulled out his gold watch and took it off the chain. The two
listeners opened their eyes wide. Was he going to make a present of it
to Levin?

"Handed me on that occasion this gold watch which he, in his turn, had
received from his father in the year...."

Again those dreadful figures--he must refer back.

"This gold watch, gentlemen, was presented to me, and I cannot think
without emotion of the moment--when I received it. Perhaps you think
I'm selfish gentlemen? I'm not. I know it's not good form to speak of
oneself, but on such an occasion as this it seems very natural to
glance at--the past. I only want to mention one little incident."

He had forgotten Levin and the significance of the day and was under
the impression that he was celebrating the close of his bachelor-life.
All of a sudden he remembered the scene between himself and his
brother, and his triumph. He felt a pressing need to talk of this
triumph, but he could not remember the details. He merely remembered
having proved that his brother was a blackguard; he had forgotten the
chain of evidence with the exception of only two facts: his brother and
a blackguard: he tried to link them together, but they always fell
apart. His brain worked incessantly and picture followed on picture. He
must tell them of a generous action he had done; he recollected that he
had given his wife some money in the morning, and had allowed her to
sleep as long as she liked and have breakfast in bed; but that wasn't
a suitable subject. He was in an unpleasant position, but fear of a
silence and the two pairs of sharp eyes which followed his every
movement, helped him to pull himself together. He realized that he was
still standing, watch in hand. The watch? How had it got into his hand?
Why were his friends sitting down, almost blotted out by the smoke,
while he was on his legs? Oh! of course! He had been telling them about
the watch, and they were waiting for the continuation of the story.

"This watch, gentlemen, is nothing special at all. It's only French
gold."

The two whilom owners of silver watches opened their eyes wide. This
information was new to them.

"And I believe it has only seven rubies--it's not a good watch at
all--on the contrary--I should rather call it a cheap one...."

Some secret cause of which his brain was hardly conscious, made him
angry; he must vent his wrath on something; tapping the table with his
watch, he shouted:

"It's a damned bad watch, I say! Listen to me when I'm speaking! Don't
you believe what I say, Fritz? Answer me! Why do you look so vicious?
You don't believe me. I can read it in your eyes. Fritz, you don't
believe what I'm saying. Believe me, I know human nature. And I might
stand security for you once more! Either you are a liar, or I am! Shall
I prove to you that you are a scoundrel? Shall I? Listen, Nyström,
if--I--forge a bill--am I a scoundrel?"

"Of course you are a scoundrel, the devil take you!" answered Nyström,
without a moment's hesitation.

"Yes--Yes!"

His efforts to remember whether Levin had forged a bill, or was in any
way connected with a bill, were in vain. Therefore he was obliged to
let the matter drop. Levin was tired; he was also afraid that his
victim might lose consciousness, and that he and Nyström would be
robbed of the pleasure of enjoying his intended discomfiture. He
therefore interrupted Falk with a jest in his host's own style.

"Your health, old rascal!"

And down came the whip. He produced a newspaper.

"Have you seen the _People's Flag_?" he asked Falk in cold murderous
accents.

Falk stared at the scandalous paper but said nothing. The inevitable
was bound to happen.

"It contains a splendid article on the Board of Payment of Employés'
Salaries."

Falk's cheeks grew white.

"Rumour has it that your brother wrote it."

"It's a lie! My brother's no scandal-monger! He isn't! D'you hear?"

"But unfortunately he had to suffer for it. I'm told he's been sacked."

"It's a lie!"

"I'm afraid it's true. Moreover, I saw him dining to-day at the
'Brass-Button' with a rascally looking chap. I'm sorry for the lad."

It was the worst blow that could have befallen Charles Nicholas. He was
disgraced. His name, his father's name, was dishonoured; all that the
old burgesses had achieved had been in vain. If he had been told that
his wife had died, he could have borne up under it; a financial loss,
too, might have been repaired. If he had been told that his friend
Levin, or Nyström, had been arrested for forgery, he would have
disowned them, for he had never shown himself in public in their
company. But he could not deny his relationship to his brother. And his
brother had disgraced him. There was no getting away from the fact.

Levin had found a certain pleasure in retailing his information. Falk,
although he had never given his brother the smallest encouragement, was
in the habit of boasting of him and his achievements to his friends.
"My brother, the assessor, is a man of brains, and he'll go far, mark
my words!" These continual indirect reproaches had long been a source
of irritation to Levin, more particularly as Charles Nicholas drew a
definite, unsurpassable, although indefinable, line between assessors
and secretaries.

Levin, without moving a finger in the matter, had had his revenge at so
little cost to himself that he could afford to be generous, and play
the part of the comforter.

"There's no reason why you should take it so much to heart. Even a
journalist can be a decent specimen of humanity, and you exaggerate the
scandal. There can be no scandal where no definite individuals have
been attacked. Moreover, the whole thing's very witty, and everybody's
reading it."

This last pill of comfort made Falk furious.

"He's robbed me of my good name! My name! How can I show myself
to-morrow at the Exchange? What will people say?"

By people he meant his wife. She would enjoy the situation because it
would make the misalliance less marked. Henceforth they would be on the
same social level. The thought was intolerable. A bitter hatred for all
mankind took possession of his soul. If only he had been the bastard's
father! Then he could have made use of his parental privilege, washed
his hands of him, cursed him, and so have put an end to the matter; but
there was no such thing as a brotherly privilege. Was it possible that
he himself, was partly to blame for the disgrace? Had he not forced his
brother into his profession? Maybe the scene of the morning or his
brother's financial difficulties--caused by him--were to blame? No! he
had never committed a base action; he was blameless; he was respected
and looked up to; he was no scandal-monger; he had never been sacked by
anybody. Did he not carry a paper in his pocket-book, testifying that
he was the kindest friend with the kindest heart? Had not the
schoolmaster read it aloud a little while ago? Yes, certainly--and he
sat down to drink, drink immoderately--not to stupefy his conscience,
there was no necessity for that, he had done no wrong, but merely to
drown his anger. But it was no use; it boiled over--and scalded those
who sat nearest to him.

"Drink, you rascals! That brute there's asleep! And you call yourselves
friends! Waken him up, Levin!"

"Whom are you shouting at?" asked the offended Levin peevishly.

"At you, of course!"

Two glances were exchanged across the table which promised no good.
Falk, whose temper improved directly he saw another man in a rage,
poured a ladleful of the contents of the bowl on the schoolmaster's
head, so that it trickled down his neck behind his collar.

"Don't dare to do that again!" threatened Levin.

"Who's to prevent me?"

"I! Yes, I! I shan't let you ruin his clothes. It's a beastly shame!"

"His clothes," laughed Falk. "Isn't it my coat? Didn't I give it to
him?"

"You're going too far!" said Levin, rising to go.

"So you're going now! You've had enough to eat, you can't drink any
more, you don't want me any longer to-night. Didn't you want to borrow
a fiver? What? Am I to be deprived of the honour of lending you some
money? Didn't you want me to sign something? Sign, eh?"

At the word sign, Levin pricked up his ears. Supposing he tried to get
the better of him in his excited condition? The thought softened him.

"Don't be unjust, brother," he re-commenced. "I'm not ungrateful; I
fully appreciate your kindness; but I'm poor, poorer than you've ever
been, or ever can be; I've suffered humiliations which you can't even
conceive; but I've always looked upon you as a friend. I mean a friend
in the highest sense of the word. You've had too much to drink to-night
and so you're cross; this makes you unjust, but I assure you,
gentlemen, in the whole world there beats no kinder heart than that of
Charles Nicholas. And I don't say this for the first time. I thank you
for your courtesy to-night, that is to say, if the excellent supper we
have eaten, the magnificent wines we have drunk, have been eaten and
drunk in my honour. I thank you, brother, and drink your health. Here's
to you, brother Charles Nicholas! Thank you, thank you a thousand
times! You've not done it in vain! Mark my words!"

Strange to say, these words, spoken in a tremulous voice--tremulous
with emotion--produced good results. Falk felt good. Hadn't he again
been assured that he had a kind heart? He firmly believed it.

The intoxication had reached the sentimental stage; they moved nearer
together; they talked of their good qualities, of the wickedness of the
world, the warmth of their feelings, the strength of their good
intentions; they grasped each other's hands. Falk spoke of his wife; of
his kindness to her; he regretted the lack of spirituality in his
calling; he mentioned how painfully aware he was of his want of
culture; he said that his life was a failure; and after the consumption
of his tenth liqueur, he confided to Levin that it had been his
ambition to go into the church, become a missionary, even. They grew
more and more spiritual. Levin spoke of his dead mother, her death and
funeral, of an unhappy love-affair, and finally of his religious
convictions, as a rule jealously guarded as a secret. And soon they
were launched on an eager discussion of religion.

It struck one--it struck two--and they were still talking while Nyström
slept soundly, his arms on the table, and his head resting on his arms.
A dense cloud of tobacco smoke filled the counting-house and robbed
the gas flames of their brilliancy. The seven candles of the
seven-armed candelabrum had burnt down to the sockets and the table
presented a dismal sight. One or two glasses had lost their stems, the
stained tablecloth was covered with cigar ash, the floor was strewn
with matches. The daylight was breaking through the chinks of the
shutters; its shafts pierced the cloud of smoke and drew cabbalistic
figures on the tablecloth between the two champions of their faith,
busily engaged in re-editing the Augsburg Confession. They were now
talking with hissing voices; their brains were numbed; their words
sounded dry, the tension was relaxing in spite of their diligent
recourse to the bottle. They tried to whip up their souls into an
ecstasy, but their efforts grew weaker and weaker; the spirit had died
out of their conversation; they only exchanged meaningless words; the
stupefied brains which had been whirling round like teetotums,
slackened in their speed and finally stopped; one thought alone filled
their minds--they must go to bed, if they did not want to loathe the
sight of each other; they must be alone.

Nyström was shaken into consciousness; Levin embraced Charles Nicholas
and took the opportunity to pocket three of his cigars. The heights
which they had scaled were too sublime to allow them to talk of the
bill just yet. They parted--the host let his guests out--he was alone!
He opened the shutters--daylight poured into the room; he opened the
window; the cool sea-breeze swept through the narrow street, one side
of which was already illuminated by the rising sun. It struck four, he
listened to that wonderful striking only heard by the poor wretch who
yearns for the day on a bed of sickness or sorrow. Even Long Street
East, that street of vice, of filth and brawls, lay in the early
morning sun, still, desolate and pure. Falk felt deeply unhappy. He was
disgraced--he was lonely! He closed window and shutters, and as he
turned round and beheld the state of the room, he at once began
setting it straight. He picked up the cigar ends and threw them into
the grate; he cleared the table, swept the room, dusted it and put
everything in its place. He washed his face and hands, and brushed his
hair; a policeman might have thought him a murderer, intent on effacing
all traces of his crime. But all the while he thought, clearly, firmly
and logically. When he had straightened the room and himself, he formed
a resolution, long brooded over, but now to be carried into effect. He
would wipe away the disgrace which had fallen on his family; he would
rise in the world and become a well-known and influential man; he would
begin a new life; he would keep his reputation unstained and he would
make his name respected. He felt that only a great ambition could help
him to keep his head erect after the blow he had received to-night.
Ambition had been latent in his heart; it had been awakened and
henceforth it should rule his life.

Quite sober now, he lighted a cigar, drank a brandy, and went upstairs,
quietly, gently, so as not to disturb his sleeping wife.




CHAPTER V

AT THE PUBLISHER'S


Arvid Falk decided to try Smith first, the almighty Smith--a name
adopted by the publisher in his youth during a short trip to the great
continent, from exaggerated admiration of everything American--the
redoubtable Smith with his thousand arms who could _make_ a writer in
twelve months, however bad the original material. His method was well
known, though none but he dared to make use of it, for it required an
unparalleled amount of impudence. The writer whom he took up could be
sure of making a name; hence Smith was overrun with nameless writers.

The following story is told as an instance of his irresistible power
and capacity for starting an author on the road to fame. A young,
inexperienced writer submitted his first novel, a bad one, to Smith.
For some reason the latter happened to like the first chapter--he never
read more--and decided to bless the world with a new author. The book
was published bearing on the back of the cover the words: "Blood and
Sword. A novel by Gustav Sjöholm. This work of the young and promising
author whose highly respected name has for a long time been familiar to
the widest circles, etc. etc. It is a book which we can strongly
recommend to the novel-reading public." The book was published on April
3. On April 4, a review appeared in the widely read metropolitan paper
the _Grey Bonnet_, in which Smith held fifty shares. It concluded by
saying: "Gustav Sjöholm's name is already well known; the spreading of
his fame does not lie with us; and we recommend this book not only to
the novel-reading, but also to the novel-writing public." On April 5 an
advertisement appeared in every paper of the capital with the following
quotation: "Gustav Sjöholm's name is already well known; the spreading
of his fame does not lie with us. (_Grey Bonnet_)." On the same evening
a notice appeared in the _Incorruptible_, a paper read by nobody. It
represented the book as a model of bad literature, and the reviewer
swore that Gustav Sjöblom (reviewer's intentional slip), had no name at
all. But as nobody read the _Incorruptible_, the opposition remained
unheard. The other papers, unwilling to disagree with the venerable
leading _Grey Bonnet_, and afraid of offending Smith, were mild in
their criticisms, but no more. They held the view that with hard work
Gustav Sjöholm might make a name for himself in the future. A few days
of silence followed, but in every paper--in the _Incorruptible_ in bold
type--appeared the advertisement, shouting: "Gustav Sjöholm's name is
already well known." Then a correspondence was started in the
_X-köpings Miscellaneous_, reproaching the metropolitan papers with
being hard on young authors. "Gustav Sjöholm is simply a genius,"
affirmed the hot-headed correspondent, "in spite of all that dogmatic
blockheads might say to the contrary." On the next day the
advertisement again appeared in all the papers, bawling: "Gustav
Sjöholm's name is already well known, etc. (_Grey Bonnet_)." "Gustav
Sjöholm is a genius, etc. (_X-köpings Miscellaneous_)." The cover of
the next number of the magazine _Our Land_, one of Smith's
publications, bore the notice: "We are pleased to be in a position to
inform our numerous subscribers that the brilliant young author Gustav
Sjöholm has promised us an original novel for our next number, etc."
And then again the advertisement in the papers. Finally, when at
Christmas the almanac _Our People_ appeared, the authors mentioned on
the title page were: Orvar Odd, Talis Qualis, Gustav Sjöholm, and
others. It was a fact. In the eighth month Gustav Sjöholm was made. And
the public was powerless. It had to swallow him. It was impossible to
go into a bookseller's and look at a book without reading his name;
impossible to take up a newspaper without coming across it. In all
circumstances and conditions of life that name obtruded itself, printed
on a slip of paper; it was put into the housewives' market baskets on
Saturdays; the servants carried it home from the tradespeople; the
crossing-sweeper swept it off the street, and the man of leisure went
about with it in the pockets of his dressing-gown.

Being well aware of Smith's great power, the young man climbed the dark
stairs of the publisher's house close to the Great Church, not without
misgivings. He had to wait for a long time in an outer office, a prey
to the most unpleasant meditations, until suddenly the door was burst
open and a young man rushed out of an inner office, despair on his face
and a roll of paper under his arm. Shaking in every limb, Falk entered
the sanctum, where the despot received his visitors, seated on a low
sofa, calm and serene as a god; he kindly nodded his grey head, covered
by a blue cap, and went on smoking, peacefully, as if he had never
shattered a man's hopes or turned an unhappy wretch from his door.

"Good morning, sir, good morning!"

His divinely flashing eyes glanced at the newcomer's clothes and
approved; nevertheless he did not ask him to sit down.

"My name is--Falk."

"Unknown to me! What is your father?"

"My father is dead."

"Is he? Good! What can I do for you, sir?"

Falk produced a manuscript from his breast pocket and handed it to
Smith; the latter sat on it without looking at it.

"You want me to publish it? Verse? I might have guessed it! Do you
know the cost of printing a single page, sir? No, you don't."

And he playfully poked the ignoramus with the stem of his pipe.

"Have you made a name, sir? No! Have you distinguished yourself in any
way? No!"

"The Academy has praised these verses."

"Which Academy? The Academy of Sciences? The one which publishes all
that stuff about flints?"

"About flints?"

"Yes, you know the Academy of Sciences! Close to the Museum, near the
river. Well, then!"

"Oh, no, Mr. Smith! The Swedish Academy, in the Exchange...."

"I see! The one with the tallow candles! Never mind; no man on earth
can tell what purpose it serves! No, my dear sir, the essential thing
is to have a name, a name like Tegnér, like Ohrenschlägel, like--Yes!
Our country has many great poets, but I can't remember them just at the
moment; but a name is necessary. Mr. Falk? H'm! Who knows Mr. Falk? I
don't, and I know many great poets. As I recently said to my friend
Ibsen: 'Now just you listen to me, Ibsen'--I call him Ibsen, quite
plainly--'just you listen to me, write something for my magazine. I'll
pay you whatever you ask!' He wrote--I paid--but I got my money back."

The annihilated young man longed to sink through the chinks in the
floor when he realized that he was standing before a person who called
Ibsen quite plainly "Ibsen." He longed to recover his manuscript, and
go his way, as the other young man had done, away, far away, until he
came to running water. Smith guessed it.

"Well, I've no doubt you can write Swedish, sir. And you know our
literature better than I do. Good! I have an idea. I am told of great,
beautiful, spiritual writers who lived in the past, let's say in the
reign of Gustav Eriksson and his daughter Christina. Isn't that so?"

"Gustavus Adolfus."

"Gustavus Adolfus, so be it! I remember there was one with a great, a
very great name; he wrote a fine work in verse, on God's Creation, I
believe! His Christian name was Hokan!"

"You mean Haquin Spegel, Mr. Smith! 'God's Works and Rest.'"

"Ah, yes! Well, I've been thinking of publishing it. Our nation is
yearning for religion these days; I've noticed that; and one must give
the people something. I have given them a good deal of Hermann Francke
and Arndt, but the great Foundation can sell more cheaply than I can,
and now I want to bring out something good at a fair price. Will you
take the matter in hand?"

"I don't know where I come in, as it is but a question of a reprint,"
answered Falk, not daring to refuse straight out.

"Dear me, what ignorance! You would do the editing and proof-reading,
of course. Are we agreed? You publish it, sir! What? Shall we draw up a
little agreement? The work must appear in numbers. What? A little
agreement. Just hand me pen and ink. Well?"

Falk obeyed; he was unable to offer resistance. Smith wrote and Falk
signed.

"Well, so much for that! Now, there's another thing! Give me that
little book on the stand! The third shelf! There! Now look here! A
brochure--title: "The Guardian Angel." Look at the vignette! An angel
with an anchor and a ship--it's a schooner without any yards, I
believe! The splendid influence of marine insurance on social life in
general is well known. Everybody has at one time or other sent
something more or less valuable across the sea in a ship. What? Well!
Everybody doesn't realize this. No! Consequently it is our duty to
enlighten those who are ignorant; isn't that so? Well! We know, you and
I; therefore it is for us to enlighten those who don't. This book
maintains that everybody who sends things across the water should
insure them. But this book is badly written. Well! We'll write a better
one. What? You'll write me a novel of ten pages for my magazine _Our
Land_, and I expect you to have sufficient gumption to introduce the
name _Triton_--which is the name of a new limited liability company,
founded by my nephew, and we are told to help our neighbours--twice,
neither more nor less; but it must be done cleverly and so that it is
not at all obvious. Do you follow me?"

Falk found the offer repulsive, although it contained nothing
dishonest; however, it gave him a start with the influential man,
straight away, without any effort on his part. He thanked Smith and
accepted.

"You know the size? Sixteen inches to the page, altogether a hundred
and sixty inches of eight lines each. Shall we write a little
agreement?"

Smith drew up an agreement and Falk signed.

"Well, now! You know the history of Sweden? Go to the stand again--you
will find a cliché there, a wood block. To the right! That's it! Can
you tell me who the lady is meant for? She is supposed to be a queen."

Falk, who saw nothing at first but a piece of black wood, finally made
out some human features and declared that to the best of his belief it
represented Ulrica Eleonora.

"Didn't I say so? Hihihi! The block has been used for Elizabeth, Queen
of England, in an American popular edition. I've bought it cheaply,
with a lot of others. I'm going to use it for Ulrica Eleonora in my
_People's Library_. Our people are splendid; they are so ready to buy
my books. Will you write the letterpress?"

Although Falk did not like the order, his super-sensitive conscience
could find no wrong in the proposal.

"Well then! We'd better make out a little agreement. Sixteen pages
octavo, at three inches, at twenty-four lines each. There!"

Falk, realizing that the audience was over, made a movement to recover
his manuscript on which Smith had all along been sitting. But the
latter would not give it up; he declared that he would read it,
although it might take him some time.

"You're a sensible man, sir, who knows the value of time," he said. "I
had a young fellow here just before you came in; he also brought me
verses, a great poem, for which I have no use. I made him the same
offers I just made to you, sir; do you know what he said? He told me to
do something unmentionable. He did, indeed, and rushed out of the
office. He'll not live long, that young man! Good day, good day! Don't
forget to order a copy of Hoken Spegel! Well, good day, good day."

Smith pointed to the door with the stem of his pipe and Falk left him.

He did not walk away with light footsteps. The wood-block in his pocket
was heavy and weighed him down, kept him back. He thought of the pale
young man with the roll of manuscript who had dared to say a bold thing
to Smith, and pride stirred in his heart. But memories of old paternal
warnings and advice whispered the old lie to him that all work was
equally honourable, and reproved him for his pride. He laid hold of his
common sense and went home to write a hundred and ninety-two inches
about Ulrica Eleonora.

As he had risen early he was at his writing-table at nine o'clock. He
filled a large pipe, took two sheets of paper, wiped his steel nibs and
tried to recall all he knew about Ulrica Eleonora. He looked her up in
Ekelund and Fryxell. There was a great deal under the heading Ulrica
Eleonora, but very little about her personally. At half-past nine he had
exhausted the subject. He had written down her birthplace, and the place
where she died, when she came to the throne, when she abdicated, the
names of her parents and the name of her husband. It was a commonplace
excerpt from a church register--and filled three pages, leaving thirteen
to be covered. He smoked two or three pipes and dragged the inkstand
with his pen, as if he were fishing for the Midgard serpent, but he
brought up nothing. He was bound to say something about her personally,
sketch her character; he felt as if he were sitting in judgment on her.
Should he praise or revile her? As it was a matter of complete
indifference to him, his mind was still not made up when it struck
eleven. He reviled her--and came to the end of the fourth page, leaving
twelve to be accounted for. He was at his wits' end. He wanted to say
something about her rule, but as she had not ruled, there was nothing to
be said. He wrote about her Council--one page--leaving eleven; he
whitewashed Görtz--another--leaving ten. He had not yet filled half the
required space. He hated the woman! More pipes! Fresh steel nibs! He
went back to remoter days, passing them in review, and being now in a
thoroughly bad temper, he overthrew his old idol, Charles XII, and
hurled him in the dust; it was done in a few words, and only added one
more page to his pile. There still remained nine. He anticipated events
and criticised Frederick I. Half a page! He glanced at the paper with
unhappy eyes; he glimpsed half-way house, but could not reach it. He had
written seven and a half small pages; Ekelund had only managed one and a
half.

He flung the wood-block on the floor, kicked it underneath his
writing-table, crawled after it, dusted it and put it in its former
place. It was torture! His soul was as dry as the block. He tried to
work himself up to views which he did not hold; he tried to awaken some
sort of emotion in his heart for the dead queen, but her plain, dull
features, cut into the wood, made no more impression on him than he on
the block. He realized his incapacity and felt despondent, degraded.
And this was the career of his choice, the one he had preferred to all
others. With a strong appeal to his reason, he turned to the guardian
angel.

The brochure was originally written for a German society, the "Nereus,"
and the argument was as follows: Mr. and Mrs. Castle had emigrated to
America, where they acquired a large estate. To make the story
possible, they had sold their land, and, very unpractically, invested
the total amount realized in costly furniture and objects of art. As
the story required that everything should be completely lost and
nothing whatever saved from the shipwreck, they sent off the whole lot
in advance by the _Washington_, a first-class steamer, copper bottomed,
with watertight bulkheads, and insured with the great German Marine
Insurance Company for £60,000. Mr. and Mrs. Castle and the children
followed on the _Bolivar_, the finest boat of the White Star Line,
insured with the great Marine Insurance Company "Nereus" (Capital
$10,000,000), and safely arrived at Liverpool. They left Liverpool and
all went well until they came to Skagen Point. During the whole voyage
the weather had, of course, been magnificent; the sky was clear and
radiant, but at the dangerous Skagen Point a storm overtook them; the
steamer was wrecked; the parents, whose lives were insured, were
drowned, thereby guaranteeing to the children, who were saved, £1500.
The latter, rejoicing at their parents' foresight, arrived at Hamburg
in good spirits, eager to take possession of the insurance money and
the property which they had inherited from their parents. Imagine their
consternation when they were told that the _Washington_ had been
wrecked a fortnight before their arrival on Dogger Bank; their whole
fortune, which had been left uninsured, was lost. All that remained was
the life insurance money. They hurried to the Company's agents. A fresh
disaster! They were told that their parents had not paid the last
premium which--oh, fateful blow!--had been due on the day preceding
their death. The distressed children bitterly mourned their parents,
who had worked so hard for them. They embraced each other with tears
and made a solemn vow that henceforth all their possessions should be
insured, and that they would never neglect paying their life insurance
premiums.

This story was to be localized, adapted to a Swedish environment and
made into a readable novelette; and with this he was to make his début
in the literary world. The devil of pride whispered to him not to be a
blackguard and to leave the business alone, but this voice was silenced
by another, which came from the region of his empty stomach, and was
accompanied by a gnawing, stinging sensation. He drank a glass of water
and smoked another pipe. But his discomfort increased. His thoughts
became more gloomy; he found his room uncomfortable, the morning dull
and monotonous; he was tired and despondent; everything seemed
repulsive; his ideas were spiritless and revolved round nothing but
unpleasant subjects; and still his discomfort grew. He wondered whether
he was hungry? It was one o'clock. He never dined before three. He
anxiously examined his purse. Threepence halfpenny! For the first time
in his life he would have to go without dinner! This was a trouble
hitherto unknown to him. But with threepence halfpenny there was no
necessity to starve. He could send for bread and beer. No! That would
not do; it was _infra dig._ Go to a dairy? No! Borrow? Impossible! He
knew nobody who would lend. No sooner had he realized this than hunger
began to rage in him like a wild beast let loose, biting him, tearing
him and chasing him round the room. He smoked pipe after pipe to
stupefy the monster; in vain.

A rolling of drums from the barracks yard told him that the guardsmen
were lining up with their copper vessels to receive their dinner; every
chimney was smoking; the dinner bell went in the dockyard; a hissing
sound came from his neighbour's, the policemen's kitchen; the smell of
roast meat penetrated through the chinks of the door; he heard the
rattling of knives and plates in the adjacent room, and the children
saying grace. The paviours in the street below were taking their
after-dinner nap with their heads on their empty food baskets. The
whole town was dining; everybody, except he. He raged against God. But
all at once a clear thought shot through his brain. He seized Ulrica
Eleonora and the guardian angel, wrapped them in paper, wrote Smith's
name and address on the parcel, and handed the messenger his threepence
halfpenny. And with a sigh of relief he threw himself on his sofa and
starved, with a heart bursting with pride.




CHAPTER VI

THE RED ROOM


The same afternoon sun which had witnessed Arvid Falk's defeat in his
first battle with hunger shone serenely into the cottage of the
artists' colony, where Sellén, in shirt sleeves, was standing before
his easel working at his picture which had to be in the Exhibition on
the following morning before ten, finished, framed, and varnished. Olle
Montanus sat on the bed-sofa reading the wonderful book lent to him by
Ygberg for a day in exchange for his muffler; betweenwhiles he cast a
look of admiration at Sellén's picture. He had great faith in Sellén's
talent. Lundell was calmly working at his "Descent from the Cross"; he
had already sent three pictures to the Exhibition and, like many
others, he was awaiting their sale with a certain amount of excitement.

"It's fine, Sellén," said Olle, "you paint divinely."

"May I look at your spinach?" asked Lundell, who never admired
anything, on principle.

The subject was simple and grand. The picture represented a stretch of
drifting sand on the coast of Halland with the sea in the background;
it was full of the feeling of autumn; sunbeams were breaking through
riven clouds; the foreground was partly drift sand and newly washed-up
seaweed, dripping wet and lit by the sun; in the middle distance lay
the sea, with huge crested waves--the greater part in deep shadow; but
in the background, on the horizon, the sun was shining, opening up a
perspective into infinity; the only figures were a flock of birds.

No unperverted mind who had the courage to face the mysterious wealth
of solitude, had seen promising harvests choked by the drifting sand,
could fail to understand the picture. It was painted with inspiration
and talent; the colouring was the result of the prevailing mood, the
mood was not engendered by the colouring.

"You _must_ have something in the foreground," persisted Lundell. "Take
my advice."

"Rubbish!" replied Sellén.

"Do what I tell you, and don't be a fool, otherwise you won't sell.
Paint in a figure; a girl by preference; I'll help you if you don't
know how to do it. Look here...."

"None of your tricks! What's the good of petticoats in a high wind?
You're mad on petticoats!"

"Very well, do as you like," replied Lundell, a little hurt by the
reference to one of his weakest points. "But instead of those grey
gulls you should have painted storks. Nobody can tell what sort of
birds these are. Picture the red storks' legs against the dark cloud!
What a contrast!"

"You don't understand!"

Sellén was not clever in stating his motives, but he was sure of his
points and his sound instincts led him safely past all errors.

"You won't sell," Lundell began again; his friend's financial position
worried him.

"Well, I shall live somehow in spite of it. Have I ever sold anything?
Am I the worse for it? Do you think I don't know that I should sell if
I painted like everybody else? Do you think I can't paint as badly as
everybody else? I just don't want to!"

"But you ought to think of paying your debts! You owe Mr. Lund of the
'Sauce-Pan' several hundred crowns."

"Well, that won't ruin him. Moreover I gave him a picture worth twice
that amount."

"You are the most selfish man I ever met! The picture wasn't worth
twenty crowns."

"I value it at five hundred, as prices go! But unfortunately
inclinations and tastes differ here below. I find your 'Crucifixion' an
execrable performance, you find it beautiful. Nobody can blame you for
it. Tastes differ!"

"But you spoilt our credit at the 'Sauce-Pan.' Mr. Lund refused to give
me credit yesterday, and I don't know how I'm to get a dinner to-day."

"What does it matter? Do without it! I haven't had a dinner these last
two years."

"You plundered Mr. Falk the other day, when he fell into your
clutches."

"That's true! He's a nice chap; moreover, he has talent. There's much
originality in his verses; I have read some of them these last few
evenings. But I'm afraid he's not hard enough to get on in this world.
He's too sensitive, the rascal!"

"If he sees much of you, he'll get over that. It's outrageous how you
spoilt that young Rehnhjelm in so short a time. I hear you are
encouraging him to go on the stage."

"Did he tell you that? The little devil! He'll get on if he remains
alive; but that's not so simple when one has so little to eat! God's
death! I've no more paint! Can you spare any white? Merciful Lord! All
the tubes are empty! You must give me some, Lundell!"

"I've no more than I want for myself--and even if I had, I should take
jolly good care not to give you any."

"Stop talking nonsense! You know there's no time to lose!"

"Seriously, I haven't got your colours. If you weren't so wasteful your
tubes would go further."

"I know that! Give me some money, then!"

"Money, indeed! That's no go!"

"Get up, Olle! You must go and pawn something."

At the word pawn Olle's face brightened; he saw a prospect of food.

Sellén was searching the room.

"What's this? A pair of boots! We'll get twopence halfpenny on them;
they'd better be sold."

"They're Rehnhjelm's! You can't take them," objected Lundell, who had
meant to put them on in the afternoon when he was going up to town.
"Surely you aren't going to take liberties with other people's
property!"

"Why not? He'll be getting money for them. What's in this parcel? A
velvet waistcoat! A beauty! I shall keep it for myself and then Olle
can pawn mine. Collars and cuffs? Oh! paper! A pair of socks! Here,
Olle, twopence halfpenny! Wrap them in the waistcoat! You can sell the
empty bottles--I think the best thing would be to sell everything."

"Do you mean to say you are going to sell other people's belongings?
Have you no sense of right and wrong?" interrupted Lundell again,
hoping to gain possession of the parcel which had long tempted him, by
means of persuasion.

"He'll get paid for it later on! But it isn't enough yet. We must take
the sheets off the bed. Why not? We don't want any sheets! Here, Olle,
cram them in!"

Olle very skilfully made a bag of one of the sheets and stuffed
everything into it, while Lundell went on eagerly protesting.

When the parcel was made, Olle took it under his arm, buttoned his
ragged coat so as to hide the absence of a waistcoat, and set out on
his way to the town.

"He looks like a thief," said Sellén, watching him from the window with
a sly smile. "I hope the police won't interfere with him! Hurry up,
Olle!" he shouted after the retreating figure. "Buy six French rolls
and two half-pints of beer if there's anything over after you've bought
the paint."

Olle turned round and waved his hat with as much assurance as if he had
the feast already safely in his pockets.

Lundell and Sellén were alone. Sellén was admiring his new velvet
waistcoat for which Lundell had nursed a secret passion for a long
time. He scraped his palette and cast envious glances at the lost
glory. But it was something else he was trying to speak of; something
else, which was very difficult to mention.

"I wish you'd look at my picture," he said at last. "What do you think
of it, seriously?"

"Don't draw and slave at it so much! Paint! Where does the light come
from? From the clothes, from the flesh! It's crazy! What do these
people breathe? Colour! Turpentine! I see no air!"

"Well," said Lundell, "tastes differ, as you said just now. What do you
think of the composition?"

"Too many people!"

"You're awful! I want more, not fewer."

"Let me see! There's one great mistake in it."

Sellén shot a long glance at the picture, a glance peculiar to the
inhabitants of sea-coasts and plains.

"Yes, you're right," agreed Lundell. "You can see it then?"

"There are only men in your picture. It's somewhat monotonous."

"That's it! But fancy, that you should see that!"

"You want a woman then?"

Lundell looked at him, wondering whether he was joking, but was unable
to settle the point, for Sellén was whistling.

"Yes, I want a female figure," he replied at last.

There was silence, and gradually the silence became uncomfortable: two
very old acquaintances in a _tête-à-tête_ conversation.

"I wish I knew where to get a model from! I don't want the Academy
models, the whole world knows them, and, besides, the subject is a
religious one."

"You want something better? I understand! If it were not for the nude,
I might perhaps...."

"It isn't for the nude! Are you mad? Among all those men ... besides,
it's a religious subject."

"Yes, yes, we know all that. She must be dressed in something Oriental,
and bend down as if she were picking up something, show her shoulders,
her neck, and the first vertebra, I understand. Religious like the
Magdalene! Bird's-eye view!"

"You scoff and jeer at everything!"

"Let's keep to the point! You shall have your model, for it's
impossible to paint without one. You, yourself, don't know one. Very
well! Your religious principles don't allow you to look for one;
therefore Rehnhjelm and I, the two black sheep, will find you one."

"But it must be a respectable girl, don't forget that."

"Of course! We will see what we can do, the day after to-morrow, when
we shall be in funds."

And they went on painting, quietly, diligently, until four--until five.
Every now and then their anxious glances swept the road. Sellén was the
first to break the uneasy silence.

"Olle is a long time! Something must have happened to him," he said.

"Yes, something must be up. But why do you always send the poor devil?
Why can't you run your own errands?"

"He's nothing else to do, and he likes going."

"How d'you know? And besides, let me tell you, nobody can say how
Olle's going to turn out. He has great schemes, and he may be on his
feet any day; then it will be a good thing to have him for a friend."

"You don't say so! What great work is he going to accomplish? I can
quite believe that Olle will become a great man, although not a great
sculptor. But where the devil is he? Do you think he's spending the
money?"

"Possibly, possibly! He's had nothing for a long time and perhaps the
temptation was too strong," answered Lundell, tightening his belt by
two holes, and wondering what he would do in Olle's place.

"Well, he's only human, and charity begins at home," said Sellén, who
knew perfectly well what he would have done under the circumstances.
"But I can't wait any longer. I must have paint, even if I have to
steal it. I'll go and see Falk."

"Are you going to squeeze more out of that poor chap? You robbed him
yesterday for your frame. And it wasn't a small sum you borrowed."

"My dear fellow! I am compelled to cast all feelings of shame to the
winds; there's no help for it. One has to put up with a good deal.
However, Falk is a great-hearted fellow who understands that a man may
suddenly find himself in Queer Street. Anyhow, I'm going. If Olle
returns in the meantime, tell him he's a blockhead. So long! Come to
the Red Room and we'll see whether our master will be graciously
pleased to give us something to eat before the sun sets. Lock the door,
when you leave, and push the key underneath the mat. By-by!"

He went, and before long he stood before Falk's door in Count Magni
Street. He knocked, but received no reply. He opened the door and went
in. Falk, who had probably had uneasy dreams, awakened from his sleep,
jumped up and stared at Sellén without recognizing him.

"Good evening, old chap," said Sellén.

"Oh! It's you. I must have had a strange dream. Good evening! Sit down
and smoke a pipe! Is it evening already?"

Sellén thought he knew the symptoms, but he pretended to notice
nothing.

"You didn't go to the 'Brass Button' to-day?" he remarked.

"No," replied Falk, confused; "I wasn't there, I was at Iduna."

He really did not know whether he had dreamt it or whether he had
actually been there; but he was glad that he had said it, for he was
ashamed of his position.

"Perfectly right, old chap," commented Sellén; "the cooking at the
'Brass Button' is beneath criticism."

"It is, indeed," agreed Falk; "the soup's damned bad."

"And the old head-waiter is always on the spot, counting the rolls and
butter, the rascal!"

The words "rolls and butter" awakened Falk to consciousness; he did not
feel hungry, only a little shaky and faint. But he did not like the
subject of conversation and changed it.

"Well, will your picture be ready for to-morrow?" he asked.

"No, unfortunately, it won't."

"What's the matter now?"

"I can't possibly finish it."

"You can't? Why aren't you at home working?"

"The old, old story, my dear fellow! I have no paint! No paint!"

"But there's a remedy for that! Or haven't you any money?"

"If I had I should be all right."

"And I haven't any either! What's to be done?"

Sellén dropped his eyes until his glance reached the height of Falk's
waistcoat pocket, into which a heavy gold chain was creeping; not that
Sellén believed it to be gold, good, stamped gold. He could not have
understood the recklessness of carrying so much money outside one's
waistcoat. But his thoughts were following a definite course, and he
continued:

"If at least I had something to pawn! But we carelessly pledged our
winter overcoats on the first sunny day in April."

Falk blushed. He had never done such a thing.

"Do you pawn your winter overcoats?" he asked. "Do you get anything on
them?"

"One gets something on everything--on everything," said Sellén, laying
stress on _everything_; "the only thing needful is to have something."

To Falk the room seemed to be turning round. He had to sit down. Then
he pulled out his gold watch.

"How much, do you think, should I get on this watch and chain?"

Sellén seized the future pledges and looked at them with the eye of a
connoisseur.

"Is it gold?" he asked faintly.

"It is gold."

"Stamped?"

"Stamped."

"The chain, too?"

"The chain, too."

"A hundred crowns," declared Sellén, shaking his hand so that the gold
chain rattled. "But it's a pity! You shouldn't pawn your things for my
sake."

"Then for my own," said Falk, anxious to avoid the semblance of an
unselfishness which he did not feel. "I want money, too. If you'll turn
them into cash, you'll do me a service."

"All right then," said Sellén, resolved not to embarrass his friend by
asking indelicate questions. "I'll pawn them! Pull yourself together,
old chap! Life is hard at times, I don't deny it; but we go through
with it."

He patted Falk's shoulder with a cordiality which did not often pierce
the scorn with which he had enveloped himself.

They went out together.

By the time they had concluded the business it was seven o'clock. They
bought the paint and repaired to the Red Room.

      *       *       *       *       *

Berns' "Salon" had just begun to play its civilizing part in the life
of Stockholm by putting an end to the unhealthy _café-chantants_ life
which had flourished--or raged--in the sixties, and from the capital
had spread over the whole country. Here, every evening after seven,
crowds of young people met who lived in that abnormal transition stage
which begins on leaving the parental roof and ends with the foundation
of a new home and family; here were numbers of young men who had
escaped from the solitude of their room or attic to find light and
warmth and a fellow-creature to talk to. The proprietor had made more
than one attempt to amuse his patrons by pantomimic, gymnastic, ballet,
and other performances; but he had been plainly shown that his guests
were not in search of amusement, but in quest of peace; what was wanted
was a consulting-room, where one was likely every moment to chance on a
friend. The band was tolerated because it did not stop conversation,
but rather stimulated it, and gradually it became as much a component
of the Stockholm evening diet, as punch and tobacco.

In this way Berns' Salon became the bachelors' club of all Stockholm.
Every circle had its special corner; the colonists of Lill-Jans had
usurped the inner chess room, usually called the Red Room on account of
its red furniture and for the sake of brevity. It was a safe
meeting-ground even if during the whole day the members had been
scattered like chaff. When times were hard and funds had to be raised
at any cost, regular raids were made from this spot round the room. A
chain was formed: two members skirmished in the galleries, and two
others attacked the room lengthways. One might have said they dredged
the room with a ground-net, and they rarely dredged in vain, for there
was a constant flow of new arrivals during the evening.

To-night, however, these efforts were not required; Sellén, calmly and
proudly, sat down on the red sofa in the background. After having acted
a little farce on the subject of what they were going to drink, they
came to the conclusion that they must have something to eat first. They
were starting the "sexa," and Falk was beginning to feel a return of
his strength, when a long shadow fell across their table. Before them
stood Ygberg, as pale and emaciated as ever. Sellén, who was in funds
to-night, and under those circumstances invariably courteous and
kind-hearted, pressed him to have dinner with them, and Falk seconded
the invitation. Ygberg hesitated while examining the contents of the
dishes and calculating whether his hunger would be satisfied or only
half-satisfied.

"You wield a stinging pen, Mr. Falk," he said, in order to deflect the
attention from the raids which his fork was making on the tray.

"How? What do you mean?" asked Falk flushing; he did not know that
anybody had made the acquaintance of his pen.

"The article has created a sensation."

"What article? I don't understand."

"The correspondence in the _People's Flag_ on the Board of Payment of
Employés' Salaries."

"I didn't write it."

"But the Board is convinced that you did. I just met a member who's a
friend of mine; he mentioned you as the author; I understood that the
resentment was fierce."

"Indeed?"

Falk felt that he was half to blame for it; he realized now what the
notes were which Struve had been making on that evening on Moses
Height. But Struve had merely reported what he, Falk, had said. He was
responsible for his statements and must stand by them even at the risk
of being considered a scandal-monger. Retreat was impossible; he
realized that he must go on.

"Very well," he said, "I am the instigator of the article. But let us
talk of something else! What do you think of Ulrica Eleonora? Isn't she
an interesting character? Or what is your opinion of the Maritime
Insurance Company Triton? Or Haquin Spegel?"

"Ulrica Eleonora is the most interesting character in the whole history
of Sweden," answered Ygberg gravely; "I've just had an order to write
an essay on her."

"From Smith?" asked Falk.

"Yes; but how do you know?"

"I've returned the block this afternoon."

"It's wrong to refuse work. You'll repent it! Believe me."

A hectic flush crimsoned Falk's cheeks; he spoke feverishly. Sellén sat
quietly on the sofa, smoking. He paid more attention to the band than
to the conversation, which did not interest him because he did not
understand it. From his sofa corner he could see through the two open
doors leading to the south gallery, and catch a glimpse of the north
gallery. In spite of the dense cloud of smoke which hung above the pit
between the two galleries, he could distinguish the faces on the other
side. Suddenly his attention was caught by something in the distance.
He clutched Falk's arm.

"The sly-boots! Look behind the left curtain!"

"Lundell!"

"Just so! He's looking for a Magdalene! See! He's talking to her now!
What a beautiful girl!"

Falk blushed, a fact which did not escape Sellén.

"Does he come here for his models?" he asked surprised.

"Well, where else should he go to? He can't find them in the dark."

A moment afterwards Lundell joined them; Sellén greeted him with a
patronizing nod, the significance of which did not seem to be lost on
the newcomer. He bowed to Falk with more than his usual politeness, and
expressed his astonishment at Ygberg's presence in disparaging words.
Ygberg, carefully observing him, seized the opportunity to ask him what
he would like to eat. Lundell opened his eyes; he seemed to have
fallen among magnates. He felt happy; a gentle, philanthropic mood took
possession of him, and after ordering a hot supper, he felt constrained
to give expression to his emotion. It was obvious that he wanted to say
something to Falk, but it was difficult to find an opening. The band
was playing "Hear us, Sweden!" and a moment afterwards "A Stronghold is
our God."

Falk called for more drink.

"I wonder whether you admire this fine old hymn as much as I do, Mr.
Falk?" began Lundell.

Falk, who was not conscious of admiring any one hymn more than another,
asked him to have some punch. Lundell had misgivings; he did not know
whether he could venture. He thought he had better have some more
supper first; he was not strong enough to drink. He tried to prove it,
after his third liqueur, by a short but violent attack of coughing.

"The _Torch of Reconciliation_ is a splendid name," he said presently;
"it proves at the same time the deep, religious need of atonement, and
the light which came into the world when the miracle happened which has
always given offence to the proud in spirit."

He swallowed a meat ball while carefully studying the effect of his
remark--and felt anything but flattered when he saw three blank faces
staring at him, expressing nothing but consternation.

"Spegel is a great name, and his words are not like the words of the
Pharisees. We all know that he wrote the magnificent psalm, 'The
wailing cries are silent,' a psalm which has never been equalled. Your
health, Mr. Falk! I am glad to hear that you are identifying yourself
with the work of such a man."

Lundell discovered that his glass was empty.

"I think I must have another half-pint!"

Two thoughts were humming in Falk's brain: "The fellow is drinking neat
brandy" and "How did he get to know about Spegel?" A suspicion
illuminated his mind like a flash of lightning, but he pretended to
know nothing, and merely said: "Your health, Mr. Lundell!"

The unpleasant explanation which seemed bound to follow was avoided by
the sudden entrance of Olle. It was Olle, but more rugged than before,
dirtier than before and, to judge from his appearance, lamer than
before. His hips stood out beneath his coat like bowsprits; a single
button kept his coat together close above his first rib. But he was in
good spirits and laughed on seeing so much food and drink on the table.
To Sellén's horror he began to report on the success of his mission,
all the time divesting himself of his acquisitions. He had really been
arrested by the police.

"Here are the tickets!"

He handed Sellén two green pawn-tickets across the table, which Sellén
instantly converted into a paper pellet.

He had been taken to the police station. He pointed to his coat, the
collar of which was missing. There he was asked for his name. His name
was, of course, assumed! There existed no such name as Montanus! His
native place? Västmanland! Again a false statement! The inspector was a
native of that province and knew his countrymen. His age? Twenty-eight
years! That was a lie; he must be at least forty. His domicile?
Lill-Jans! Another lie; nobody but a gardener lived there. His
profession? Artist! That also was a lie: for he looked like a dock
labourer.

"Here's your paint, four tubes! Better look at them carefully!"

His parcel had been opened and, in the process, one of the sheets had
been torn.

"Therefore I only got one and twopence halfpenny for both. You'll see
that I'm right if you'll look at the ticket."

The next question was where he had stolen the things? Olle had replied
that he had not stolen them; then the inspector drew his attention to
the fact that he had not been asked _whether_ he had stolen them, but
_where_ he had stolen them? Where? where? where?

"Here's your change, twopence halfpenny; I've kept nothing back."

Then the evidence was taken down and the stolen goods--which had been
sealed with three seals--were described. In vain had Olle protested, in
vain had he appealed to their sense of justice and humanity; the only
result of his protestations was a suggestion made by the constable to
place on record that the prisoner--he was already regarded in the light
of a prisoner--was heavily intoxicated; the suggestion was acted upon,
but the word heavily was omitted. After the inspector had repeatedly
urged the constable to try and remember whether the prisoner had
offered resistance at his arrest, and the constable had declared that
he could not take his oath on it--it would have been a very serious
matter for the prisoner looked a desperate character--but it had
_appeared_ to him that he had tried to resist by taking refuge in a
doorway the latter statement was placed on record.

Then a report was drawn up, and Olle was ordered to sign it. It ran as
follows:

A male individual of sinister and forbidding appearance was found
slinking along the row of houses in Northland Street, carrying a
suspicious-looking parcel in his hand. On his arrest he was dressed in
a green frock-coat--he wore no waistcoat--blue serge trousers, a shirt
with the initials P.L. (which clearly proves that either the shirt was
stolen or that he had given a wrong name), woollen stockings with grey
edges, and a felt hat with a cock's feather. Prisoner gave the assumed
name of Olle Montanus, falsely deposed that his people were peasants in
Västmanland and that he was an artist, domiciled at Lill-Jans,
obviously an invention. On being arrested he tried to offer resistance
by taking refuge in a doorway. Then followed a minute description of
the contents of the parcel.

As Olle refused to admit the correctness of this report, a telegram was
sent to the prison, and a conveyance appeared to fetch Olle, the
bundle, and a constable.

As they were turning into Mint Street, Olle caught sight of Per Illson,
a member of Parliament and a countryman of his. He called to him, and
Per Illson proved that the report was wrong. Olle was released and his
bundle was restored to him. And now he had come to join them and----

"Here are your French rolls! There are only five of them, for I've
eaten one. And here's the beer!"

He produced five French rolls from his coat pockets, laid them on the
table, and placed two bottles of beer, which he pulled out of his
trousers pockets, by the side of them, after which his figure resumed
its usual disproportions.

"Falk, old chap, you must excuse Olle; he's not used to smart society.
Put the French rolls back into your pockets, Olle! What will you be up
to next?" said Sellén disapprovingly.

Olle obeyed.

Lundell refused to have the tray taken away, although he had cleared
the dishes so thoroughly that it would have been impossible to say what
they had contained; every now and then he seized the brandy bottle,
absent-mindedly, and poured himself out half a glass. Occasionally he
stood up or turned round in his chair to "see what the band was
playing." On those occasions Sellén kept a close eye on him.

At last Rehnhjelm arrived. He had obviously been drinking; he sat down
silently, his eyes seeking an object on which they could rest while he
listened to Lundell's exhortations. Finally his weary eyes fell on
Sellén and remained riveted on the velvet waistcoat, which gave him
plenty of food for thought for the remainder of the evening. His face
brightened momentarily as if he had met an old friend; but the light
on it went out as Sellén buttoned up his coat "because there was a
draught."

Ygberg took care that Olle had some supper, and never tired of urging
him to help himself and to fill his glass.

As the evening advanced music and conversation grew more and more
lively.

This state of semi-stupor had a great charm for Falk; it was warm,
light, and noisy here; he was in the company of men whose lives he had
prolonged for a few more hours and who were therefore gay and lively,
as flies revived by the rays of the sun. He felt that he was one of
them, for he knew that in their inner consciousness they were unhappy;
they were unassuming; they understood him, and they talked like human
beings and not like books; even their coarseness was not unattractive;
there was so much naturalness in it, so much innocence; even Lundell's
hypocrisy did not repulse him; it was so naïve and sat on him so
loosely, that it could have been cast off at any moment.

And the evening passed away and the day was over which had pushed Falk
irrevocably on to the thorny path of the writer.




CHAPTER VII

THE IMITATION OF CHRIST


On the following morning Falk was awakened by a maid servant who
brought him a letter. He opened it and read:

    Timothy x. 27, 28, 29.
    First Corinth. vi. 3, 4, 5.

    DEAR BROTHER,

    The grace and peace of our Lord J. C., the love of the father and
    the fellowship of the H. G., etc., Amen.

    I read last night in the _Grey Bonnet_ that you are going to edit
    the _Torch of Reconciliation_. Meet me in my office to-morrow
    morning.

                                      Your saved brother,
                                                    NATHANAEL SKORE.


Now he partially understood Lundell's riddle. He did not know Skore,
the great champion of the Lord, personally; he knew nothing of the
_Torch of Reconciliation_, but he was curious and decided to obey the
insolent request.

At nine o'clock he was in Government Street, looking at the imposing
four-storied house, the front of which, from cellar to roof, was
covered by sign-boards: "Christian Printing office, _Peace_, Ltd.,
second floor. Editorial office, _The Inheritance of the Children of
God_, half-landing floor. Publishing office, _The Last Judgment_, first
floor. Publishing office, _The Trump of Peace_, second floor. Editorial
office of the children's paper, _Feed My Lambs_, first floor. Offices
of the Christian Prayer House Society, Ltd., _The Seat of Mercy_. Loans
granted against first securities, third floor. _Come to Jesus_, third
floor. Employment found for respectable salesmen who can offer
security. Foreign Missions Society, Ltd., _Eagle_, distribution of the
profits of the year 1867 in coupons, second floor. Offices of the
Christian Mission Steamer _Zululu_, second floor. The steamer will
leave, D.V., on the 28th. Goods received against bill of lading and
certificate at the shipping offices close to the landing-bridge where
the steamer is loading. Needlework society 'Ant Heap' receives gifts,
first floor. Clergymen's bands washed and ironed by the porter. Wafers
at 1_s._ 6_d._ a pound obtainable from the porter. Black dress-coats
for confirmation candidates let out. Unfermented wine (Mat. xix. 32) at
9½_d._ per quart; apply to the porter. (Bring your own jug.)"

On the ground floor, to the left of the archway, was a Christian
bookshop. Falk stopped for a few moments and read the titles of the
books exhibited in the window. It was the usual thing. Indiscreet
questions, impudent charges, offensive familiarities. But his attention
was mainly attracted to a number of illustrated magazines with large
English woodcuts, displayed in the window in order to attract the
passers-by. More especially the children's papers had an interesting
table of contents, and the young man in the shop could have told anyone
who cared to know that old men and women would pass hours before this
window, lost in contemplation of the illustrations, which appeared to
move their pious hearts and awaken memories of their vanished--and
perhaps wasted--youth.

He climbed the broad staircase between Pompeian frescoes reminiscent of
the path which does not lead to salvation, and came to a large room
furnished with desks like a bank, but so far unoccupied by cashiers and
book-keepers. In the centre of the room stood a writing-table, of the
size of an altar, resembling an organ with many stops; there was a
complete key-board with buttons and semaphores with trumpet-like
speaking-tubes, connected with all parts of the building. A big man in
riding-boots was standing at the writing-desk. He wore a cassock
fastened with one button at the neck which gave it a military
appearance; the coat was surmounted by a white band and the mask of a
sea captain, for the real face had long ago been mislaid in one of the
desks or boxes. The big man was slapping the tops of his boots with his
horsewhip, the handle of which was in the form of a symbolical hoof,
and sedulously smoking and chewing a strong regalia, probably to keep
his jaws in trim. Falk looked at the big man in astonishment.

This, then, was the last fashion in clergymen, for in men, too, there
is a fashion. This was the great promulgator, who had succeeded in
making it fashionable to be sinful, to thirst for mercy, to be poor and
wretched, in fact, to be a worthless specimen of humanity in every
possible way. This was the man who had brought salvation in vogue! He
had discovered a gospel for smart society. The divine ordinance of
grace had become a sport! There were competitions in viciousness in
which the prize was given to the sinner. Paper chases were arranged to
catch poor souls for the purpose of saving them; but also, let us
confess it, battues for subjects on whom to demonstrate one's
conversion in a practical manner, by venting on them the most cruel
charity.

"Oh, it's you, Mr. Falk," said the mask. "Welcome, dear friend! Perhaps
you would like to see something of my work? Pardon me, I hope you are
saved? Yes, this is the office of the printing works. Excuse me a
second."

He stepped up to the organ and pulled out several stops. The answer was
a long whistle.

"Just have a look round."

He put his mouth to one of the trumpets and shouted: "The seventh
trumpet and the eighth woe! Composition Mediæval 8, titles Gothic,
names spaced out."

A voice answered through the same trumpet: "No more manuscript." The
mask sat down at the organ, and took a pen and a sheet of foolscap. The
pen raced over the paper while he talked, cigar in mouth.

"This activity--is so extensive--that it would soon--be beyond my
strength--and my health--would be worse--than it is--if I did--not look
after it--so well."

He jumped up, pulled out another stop and shouted into another trumpet:
"Proofs of 'Have you paid your Debt?'" Then he continued writing and
talking.

"You wonder--why--I--wear riding-boots. It's first--because--I take
riding exercises--for the sake of--my health...."

A boy appeared with proofs. The mask handed them to Falk. "Please read
that," he said, speaking through his nose, because his mouth was busy,
while his eyes shouted to the boy: Wait!

"... secondly--(a movement of the ears plainly conveyed to Falk that he
had not lost the thread), because--I am of opinion--that a spiritually
minded man should not--be conspicuous--by his appearance--for this
would be--spiritual pride--and a challenge--to the scoffers."

A book-keeper entered. The mask acknowledged his salutation by a
wrinkling of his forehead, the only part of his face which was
unoccupied.

For want of something else to do, Falk took the proofs and began to
read them. The cigar continued talking:

"Everybody--wears--riding-boots. I won't--be conspicuous--by
my--appearance. I wear--riding-boots--because--I'm no humbug."

He handed the manuscript to the boy and shouted--with his lips: "Four
sticks--Seventh trumpet for Nyström!"--and then to Falk:

"I shall be disengaged in five minutes. Will you come with me to the
warehouse?"

And to the book-keeper:

"Zululu is charging?"

"Brandy," answered the book-keeper in a rusty voice.

"Everything all right?"

"Everything all right."

"In God's name, then! Come along Mr. Falk."

They entered a room the walls of which were lined with shelves, filled
with piles of books. The mask touched them with his horsewhip and said
proudly:

"I've written those! What do you think of that? Isn't it a lot? You,
too, write--a little. If you stick to it, you might write as much."

He bit and tore at his cigar and spat out the tiny flakes which filled
the air like flies and settled on the backs of the books. His face wore
a look of contempt.

"The _Torch of Reconciliation_! Hm! I think it's a stupid name! Don't
you rather agree with me? What made you think of it?"

For the first time Falk had a chance of getting in a word, for like all
great men, the mask answered his own questions. His reply was in the
negative but he got no further; the mask again usurped the
conversation.

"I think it's a very stupid name. And do you really believe that it
will draw?"

"I know nothing whatever about the matter; I don't know what you are
talking about."

"You don't know?"

He took up a paper and pointed to a paragraph.

Falk, very much taken aback, read the following advertisement:

"Notice to subscribers: The _Torch of Reconciliation_. Magazine for
Christian readers, about to appear under the editorship of Arvid Falk
whose work has been awarded a prize by the Academy of Sciences. The
first number will contain 'God's Creation,' by Hokan Spegel, a poem of
an admittedly religious and profoundly Christian spirit."

Falk had forgotten Spegel and his agreement; he stood speechless.

"How large is the edition going to be? What? Two thousand, I suppose.
Too small! No good! My _Last Judgment_ was ten thousand, and yet I
didn't make more than--what shall I say?--fifteen net."

"Fifteen?"

"Thousand, young man!"

The mask seemed to have forgotten his part and reverted to old habits.

"You know," he continued, "that I'm a popular preacher; I may say that
without boasting, for all the world knows it. You know, that I'm very
popular; I can't help that--it is so! I should be a hypocrite if I
pretended not to know what all the world knows! Well, I'll give you a
helping hand to begin with. Look at this bag here! If I say that it
contains letters from persons--ladies--don't upset yourself, I'm a
married man--begging for my portrait, I have not said too much."

As a matter of fact it was nothing but an ordinary bag which he touched
with his whip.

"To save them and me a great deal of trouble, and at the same time for
the sake of doing a fellow-man a kindness, I have decided to permit you
to write my biography; then you can safely issue ten thousand copies of
your first number and pocket a clear thousand."

"But, my dear pastor--he had it on the tip of his tongue to say
captain--I know nothing at all about this matter."

"Never mind! Never mind! The publisher has himself written to me and
asked me for my portrait. And you are to write my biography! To
facilitate your work, I asked a friend to write down the principal
points. You have only to write an introduction, brief and eloquent--a
few sticks at the most. That's all."

So much foresight depressed Falk; he was surprised to find the portrait
so unlike the original, and the friend's handwriting so much like that
of the mask.

The latter, who had given him portrait and manuscript, now held out his
hand expecting to be thanked.

"My regards to--the publisher."

He had so nearly said Smith, that a slight blush appeared between his
whiskers.

"But you don't know my views yet," protested Falk.

"Views? Have I asked what your views are? I never ask anybody about his
views. God forbid! I? Never!"

Once more he touched the backs of his publications with his whip,
opened the door, let the biographer out and returned to his service at
the altar.

Falk, as usual, could not think of a suitable answer until it was too
late; when he thought of one, he was already in the street. A cellar
window which happened to stand wide open (and was not covered with
advertisements) received biography and portrait into safe keeping.

Then Falk went to the nearest newspaper office, handed in a protest
against the _Torch of Reconciliation_, and resigned himself to starve.




CHAPTER VIII

POOR MOTHER COUNTRY


The clock on the Riddarholms Church struck ten as Falk arrived, a few
days later, at the Parliamentary buildings to assist the representative
of the Red Cap in reporting the proceedings of the Second Chamber.

He hastened his footsteps, convinced that here, where the pay was good,
strict punctuality would be looked upon as a matter of course. He
climbed the Committee stairs and was shown to the reporters' gallery on
the left. A feeling of awe overcame him as he walked across the few
boards, hung up under the roof like a pigeon house, where the men of
"free speech listen to the discussion of the country's most sacred
interests by the country's most worthy representatives."

It was a new sensation to Falk; but he was far from being impressed as
he looked down from his scaffolding into the empty hall which resembled
a Lancastrian school. It was five minutes past ten, but with the
exception of himself, not a soul was present. All of a sudden the
silence was broken by a scraping noise. A rat! he thought, but almost
immediately he discovered, on the opposite gallery, across the huge,
empty hall, a short, abject figure sharpening a pencil on the rail. He
watched the chips fluttering down and settling on the tables below.

His eyes scanned the empty walls without finding a resting-place, until
finally they fell on the old clock, dating from the time of Napoleon I,
with its imperial newly lit emblems, symbolical of the old story, and
its hands, now pointing to ten minutes past ten, symbolical in the
spirit of irony--of something else. At the same moment the doors in the
background opened and a man entered. He was old; his shoulders stooped
under the burden of public offices; his back had shrunk under the
weight of communal commissions; the long continuance in damp offices,
committee-rooms and safe deposits had warped his neck; there was a
suggestion of the pensioner in his calm footsteps, as he walked up the
cocoa-nut matting towards the chair. When he had reached the middle of
the long passage and had come into line with the imperial clock, he
stopped; he seemed accustomed to stopping half-way and looking round
and backwards; but now he stopped to compare his watch with the clock;
he shook his old, worn out head with a look of discontent: "Fast!
Fast!" he murmured. His features expressed a supernatural calm and the
assurance that his watch could not be slow. He continued his way with
the same deliberate footsteps; he might be walking towards the goal of
his life; and it was very much a question whether he had not attained
it when he arrived at the venerable chair on the platform. When he was
standing close by it he pulled out his handkerchief and blew his nose;
his eyes roamed over the brilliant audience of chairs and tables,
announcing an important event: "Gentlemen, I have blown my nose." Then
he sat down and sank into a presidential calm which might have been
sleep, if it had not been waking; and, alone in the large room, as he
imagined, alone with his God, he prepared to summon strength for the
business of the day, when a loud scraping on the left, high up,
underneath the roof, pierced the stillness; he started and turned his
head to kill with a three-quarter look the rat which dared to gnaw in
his presence. Falk who had omitted to take into account the resonant
capacity of the pigeon house, received the deadly thrust of the
murderous glance; but the glance softened as it slid down from the
eaves-mouldings, whispering--"Only a reporter; I was afraid it might
be a rat." And deep regret stole over the murderer, contrition at the
sin committed by his eye; he buried his face in his hands and--wept?
Oh, no! he rubbed off the spot which the appearance of a repulsive
object had thrown on his retina.

Presently the doors were flung wide open; the delegates were beginning
to arrive, while the hands on the clock crept forward--forward. The
president rewarded the good with friendly nods and pressures of the
hand, and punished the evil-doers by turning away his head; he was
bound to be just as the Most High.

The reporter of the Red Cap arrived, an unprepossessing individual, not
quite sober and only half awake. In spite of this he seemed to find
pleasure in answering truthfully the questions put by the newcomer.

Once more the doors were flung open and in stalked a man with as much
self-assurance as if he were in his own home: he was the treasurer of
the Inland Revenue Office and actuary of the Board of Payment of
Employés' Salaries; he approached the chair, greeted the president like
an old acquaintance and began to rummage in the papers as if they were
his own.

"Who's this?" asked Falk.

"The chief clerk," answered his friend from the Red Cap.

"What? Do they write here, too, then?"

"Too? You'll soon see! They keep a story full of clerks; the attics are
full of clerks and they'll soon have clerks in the cellars."

The room below was now presenting the aspect of an ant-heap. A rap of
the hammer and there was silence. The head clerk read the minutes of
the last meeting, and they were signed without comment. Then the same
man read a petition for a fortnight's leave, sent in by Jon Jonson from
Lerbak. It was granted.

"Do they have holidays here?" asked the novice, surprised.

"Certainly, Jon Jonson wants to go home and plant his potatoes."

The platform down below was now beginning to fill with young men armed
with pen and paper. All of them were old acquaintances from the time
when Falk was a Government official. They took their seats at little
tables as if they were going to play "Preference."

"Those are the clerks," explained the Red Cap; "they appear to
recognize you."

And they really did; they put on their eye-glasses and stared at the
pigeon house with the condescension vouchsafed in a theatre by the
occupants of the stalls to the occupants of the galleries. They
whispered among themselves, evidently discussing an absent acquaintance
who, from unmistakable evidence, must have been sitting on the chair
occupied by Falk. The latter was so deeply touched by the general
interest that he looked with anything but a friendly eye on Struve, who
was entering the pigeon house, reserved, unembarrassed, dirty and a
conservative.

The chief clerk read a petition, or a resolution, to grant the
necessary money for the provision of new door mats and new brass
numbers on the lockers destined for the reception of overshoes.

Granted!

"Where is the opposition?" asked the tyro.

"The devil knows!"

"But they say Yes to everything!"

"Wait a little and you'll see!"

"Haven't they come yet?"

"Here every one comes and goes as he pleases."

"But this is the Government Offices all over again!"

The conservative Struve, who had heard the frivolous words, thought it
incumbent on him to take up the cudgels for the Government.

"What is this, little Falk is saying?" he asked. "He mustn't growl
here."

It took Falk so long to find a suitable reply that the discussions down
below had started in the meantime.

"Don't mind him," said the Red Cap, soothingly; "he's invariably a
conservative when he has the price of a dinner in his pocket, and he's
just borrowed a fiver from me."

The chief clerk was reading: 54. Report of the Committee on Ola
Hipsson's motion to remove the fences.

Timber merchant Larsson from Norrland demanded acceptance as it stood.
"What is to become of our forests?" he burst out. "I ask you, what _is_
to become of our forests?" And he threw himself on his bench, puffing.

This racy eloquence had gone out of fashion during the last few years,
and the words were received with hisses, after which the puffing on the
Norrland bench ceased.

The representative for Oeland suggested sandstone walls; Scania's
delegate preferred box; Norbotten's opined that fences were unnecessary
where there were no fields, and a member on the Stockholm bench
proposed that the matter should be referred to a Committee of experts:
he laid stress on "experts." A violent scene followed. Death rather
than a committee! The question was put to the vote. The motion was
rejected; the fences would remain standing until they decayed.

The chief clerk was reading: 66. Report of the Committee on Carl
Jönsson's proposition to intercept the moneys for the Bible Commission.
At the sound of the venerable name of an institution a hundred years
old, even the smiles died away and a respectful silence ensued. Who
would dare to attack religion in its very foundation, who would dare to
face universal contempt? The Bishop of Ystad asked permission to speak.

"Shall I write?" asked Falk.

"No, what he says doesn't concern us."

But the conservative Struve took down the following notes: Sacred. Int.
Mother country. United names religion humanity 829, 1632. Unbelief.
Mania for innovations. God's word. Man's word. Centen. Ansgar. Zeal.
Honesty. Fairplay. Capac. Doctrine. Exist. Swed. Chch. Immemorial Swed.
Honour. Gustavus I. Gustavus Adolphus. Hill Lûtzen. Eyes Europe.
Verdict posterity. Mourning. Shame. Green fields. Wash my hands. They
would not hear.

Carl Jönsson held the floor.

"Now it's our turn!" said the Red Cap.

And they wrote while Struve embroidered the Bishop's velvet.

Twaddle. Big words. Commission sat for a hundred years. Costs 100.000
Crowns. 9 archbishops. 30 Prof. Upsala. Together 500 years. Dietaries.
Secretaries. Amanuenses. Done nothing. Proof sheet. Bad work. Money
money money. Everything by its right name. Humbug. Official
sucking-system.

No one else spoke but when the question was put to the vote, the motion
was accepted.

While the Red Cap with practised hand smoothed Jönsson's stumbling
speech, and provided it with a strong title, Falk took a rest.
Accidentally scanning the strangers' gallery, his gaze fell on a
well-known head, resting on the rail and belonging to Olle Montanus. At
the moment he had the appearance of a dog, carefully watching a bone;
and he was not there without a very definite reason, but Falk was in
the dark. Olle was very secretive.

From the end of the bench, just below the right gallery, on the very
spot where the abject individual's pencil chips had fluttered down, a
man now arose. He wore a blue uniform, had a three-cornered hat tucked
under his arm and held a roll of paper in his hand.

The hammer fell and an ironical, malicious silence followed.

"Write," said the Red Cap; "take down the figures, I'll do the rest."

"Who is it?"

"These are Royal propositions."

The man in blue was reading from the paper roll: "H.M. most gracious
proposition; to increase the funds of the department assisting young
men of birth in the study of foreign languages, under the heading of
stationery and sundry expenses, from 50.000 crowns to 56.000 crowns 37
öre."

"What are sundry expenses?" asked Falk.

"Water bottles, umbrella stands, spittoons, Venetian blinds, dinners,
tips and so on. Be quiet, there's more to come!"

The paper roll went on: "H.M. most gracious proposition to create sixty
new commissions in the West-Gotic cavalry."

"Did he say sixty?" asked Falk, who was unfamiliar with public affairs.

"Sixty, yes; write it down."

The paper roll opened out and grew bigger and bigger. "H.M. most
gracious proposition to create five new regular clerkships in the Board
of Payment of Employés' Salaries."

Great excitement at the Preference tables; great excitement on Falk's
chair.

Now the paper roll rolled itself up; the chairman rose and thanked the
reader with a bow which plainly said: "Is there nothing else we can
do?" The owner of the paper roll sat down on the bench and blew away
the chips the man above him had allowed to fall down. His stiff,
embroidered collar prevented him from committing the same offence which
the president had perpetrated earlier in the morning.

The proceedings continued. The peasant Sven Svensson asked for
permission to say a few words on the Poor Law. With one accord all the
reporters arose, yawned and stretched themselves.

"We'll go to lunch now," explained the Red Cap. "We have an hour and
ten minutes."

But Sven Svensson was speaking.

The delegates began to get up from their places; two or three of them
went out. The president spoke to some of the good members and by doing
so expressed in the name of the Government his disapproval of all Sven
Svensson might be going to say. Two older members pointed him out to a
newcomer as if he were a strange beast; they watched him for a few
moments, found him ridiculous and turned their backs on him.

The Red Cap was under the impression that politeness required him to
explain that the speaker was the "scourge" of the Chamber. He was
neither hot nor cold, could be used by no party, be won for no
interests, but he spoke--spoke. What he spoke about no one could tell,
for no paper reported him, and nobody took the trouble to look up the
records; but the clerks at the tables had sworn that if they ever came
into power, they would amend the laws for his sake.

Falk, however, who had a certain weakness for all those who were
overlooked remained behind and heard what he had not heard for many a
day: a man of honour, who lived an irreproachable life, espousing the
cause of the oppressed and the down-trodden while nobody listened to
him.

Struve, at the sight of the peasant, had taken his own departure, and
had gone to a restaurant; he was quickly followed by all the reporters
and half the deputies.

After luncheon they returned and sat down on the narrow stairs; for a
little longer they heard Sven Svensson speaking, or rather, saw him
speaking, for now the conversation had become so lively that not a
single word of the speech could be understood.

But the speaker was bound to come to an end; nobody had any objections
to make; his speech had no result whatever; it was exactly as if it had
never been made.

The chief clerk, who during this interval had had time to go to his
offices, look at the official papers, and poke his fires, was again in
his place, reading: "72. Memorial of the Royal Commission on Per
Ilsson's motion to grant ten thousand crowns for the restoration of the
old sculptures in the church of Träskola."

The dog's head on the rail of the strangers' gallery assumed a
threatening aspect; he looked as if he were going to fight for his
bone.

"Do you know the freak up there in the gallery?" asked the Red Cap.

"Olle Montanus, yes, I know him."

"Do you know that he and the church of Träskola are countrymen? He's a
shrewd fellow! Look at the expression on his face now that Träskola's
turn has come."

Per Ilsson was speaking.

Struve contemptuously turned his back on the speaker and cut himself a
piece of tobacco. But Falk and the Red Cap trimmed their pencils for
action.

"You take the flourishes, I'll take the facts," said the Red Cap.

After the lapse of a quarter of an hour Falk's paper was covered with
the following notes.

Native Culture. Social Interests. Charge of materialism. Accord. Fichte
material, Native Culture not mater. Ergo charge rejected. Venerable
temple. In the radiance morning sun pointing heavenwards. From heath.
times Philos. never dreamt. Sacred rights. Nation. Sacred Int. Native
Cult. Literature. Academy. History. Antiquity.

The speech which had repeatedly called forth universal amusement
especially at the exhumation of the deceased Fichte, provoked replies
from the Metropolitan Bench and the bench of Upsala.

The delegate on the Metropolitan bench said that although he knew
neither the church of Träskola nor Fichte and doubted whether the old
plaster-boys were worth ten thousand crowns, yet he thought himself
justified in urging the Chamber to encourage this beautiful undertaking
as it was the first time the majority had asked for money for a purpose
other than the building of bridges, fences, national schools, etc.

The delegate on the bench of Upsala held--according to Struve's
notes--that the mover of the proposition was _à priori_ right; that his
premise, that native culture should be encouraged, was correct; that
the conclusion that ten thousand crowns should be voted was binding;
that the purpose, the aim, the tendency, was beautiful, praiseworthy,
patriotic; but an error had certainly been committed. By whom? By the
Mother country? The State? The church? No! By the proponent? The
proponent was right according to common sense, and therefore the
speaker--he begged the Chamber to pardon the repetition--could only
praise the purpose, the aim, the tendency. The proposition had its
warmest sympathies; he was calling on the Chamber in the name of the
Mother country, in the name of art and civilization, to vote for it.
But he himself felt bound to vote against it, because he was of the
opinion that, conformable to the idea, it was erroneous, motiveless and
figurative, as it subsumed the conception of the place under that of
the State.

The head in the strangers' gallery rolled its eyes and moved its lips
convulsively while the motion was put to the vote; but when the
proceeding was over and the proposition had been accepted, the head
disappeared in the discontented and jostling audience.

Falk did not fail to understand the connexion between Per Ilsson's
proposition and Olle's presence and disappearance. Struve, who had
become even more loud and conservative after lunch, talked unreservedly
of many things. The Red Cap was calm and indifferent; he had ceased to
be astonished at anything.

From the dark cloud of humanity which had been rent by Olle's exit,
suddenly broke a face, clear, bright and radiant as the sun, and Arvid
Falk, whose glances had strayed to the gallery, felt compelled to cast
down his eyes and turn away his head--he had recognized his brother,
the head of the family, the pride of the name, which he intended to
make great and honourable. Behind Nicholas Falk's shoulder half of a
black face could be seen, gentle and deceitful, which seemed to whisper
secrets into the ear of the fair man. Falk had only time to be
surprised at his brother's presence--he knew his resentment at the new
form of administration--for the president had given Anders Andersson
permission to state a proposition. Andersson availed himself of the
permission with the greatest calm. "In view of certain events," he
read, "move that a Bill should be passed making his Majesty jointly and
severally liable for all joint-stock companies whose statutes he has
sanctioned."

The sun on the strangers' gallery lost its brilliancy and a storm burst
out in the Chamber.

Like a flash Count Splint was on his legs:

"_Quosque tandem, Catilina!_ It has come to that! Members are
forgetting themselves so far as to dare to criticize Government! Yes,
gentlemen, criticize Government, or, what is even worse, make a joke of
it; for this motion cannot be anything but a vulgar joke. Did I say
joke? It is treason! Oh! My poor country! Your unworthy sons have
forgotten the debt they owe you! But what else can we expect, now, that
you have lost your knightly guard, your shield and your arms! I request
the blackguard Per Andersson, or whatever his name may be, to withdraw
his motion or, by Gad! he shall see that King and country still have
loyal servants, able to pick up a stone and fling it at the head of the
many-headed hydra of treason."

Applause from the strangers' gallery; indignation in the Chamber.

"Ha! Do you think I'm afraid?"

The speaker made a gesture as if he were throwing a stone, but on every
one of the hydra's hundred faces lay a smile. Glaring round, in search
of a hydra which did not smile, the speaker discovered it in the
reporters' gallery.

"There! There!"

He pointed to the pigeon house and in his eyes lay an expression as if
he saw all hell open.

"That's the crows' nest! I hear their croaking, but it doesn't frighten
me! Arise, men of Sweden! Cut off the tree, saw through the boards,
pull down the beams, kick the chairs to pieces, break the desks into
fragments, small as my little finger--he held it up--and then burn the
blackguards until nothing of them is left. Then the kingdom will
flourish in peace and its institutions will thrive. Thus speaks a
Swedish nobleman! Peasants, remember his words!"

This speech which three years ago would have been welcomed with
acclamations, taken down verbatim and printed and circulated in
national schools and other charitable institutions, was received with
universal laughter. An amended version was placed on the record and,
strange to say, it was only reported by the opposition papers which do
not, as a rule, care to publish outbursts of this description.

The Upsala bench again craved permission to speak. The speaker quite
agreed with the last speaker; his acute ear had caught something of the
old rattling of swords. He would like to say a few words. He would like
to speak of the _idea_ of a joint-stock company as an idea, but begged
to be allowed to explain to the Chamber that a joint-stock company was
not an accumulation of funds, not a combination of people, but a moral
personality, and as such not responsible....

Shouts of laughter and loud conversation prevented the reporters from
hearing the remainder of the argument, which closed with the remark
that the interests of the country were at stake, conformable to the
idea, and that, if the motion were rejected the interests of the
country would be neglected and the State in danger.

Six speakers filled up the interval until dinner-time by giving
extracts from the official statistics of Sweden, Nauman's Fundamental
Statutes, the Legal Textbook and the Göteberg Commercial Gazette: the
conclusion invariably arrived at was that the country was in danger if
his Majesty were to be jointly and severally liable for all joint-stock
companies the statutes of which he had sanctioned; and that the
interests of the whole country were at stake. One of the speakers was
bold enough to say that the interests of the country stood on a throw
of the dice; others were of the opinion that they stood on a card,
others again that they hung on a thread; the last speaker said they
hung on a hair.

At noon the proposition to go into Committee on the motion was
rejected; that was to say, there was no need for the country to go
through the Committee-mill, the office-sieve, the Imperial
chaff-cutter, the club-winnower and the newspaper-hubbub. The country
was saved. Poor country!




CHAPTER IX

BILLS OF EXCHANGE


Some time after Arvid Falk's first experience as a reporter Charles
Nicholas Falk and his beloved wife were sitting at the breakfast table.
He was, contrary to his custom, not in dressing-gown and slippers, and
his wife was wearing an expensive morning-gown.

"Yes, they were all here yesterday," said Mrs. Falk, laughing gaily,
"all five of them, and they were extremely sorry about the matter."

"I wish the deuce...."

"Nicholas, remember you are no longer standing behind the counter."

"What am I to say then if I lose my temper?"

"One doesn't lose one's temper, one gets annoyed! And it's permissible
to say: 'It's very extraordinary!'"

"Very well, then, it's very extraordinary that you have always
something unpleasant up your sleeve. Why can't you refrain from telling
me things you know will irritate me?"

"Vex you, old man! You expect me to keep my vexations to myself; but
you lie----"

"Lay, old girl!"

"I say _lie_ your burdens on my shoulders too. Was that what you
promised me when we got married?"

"Don't make a scene, and don't let's have any of your logic! Go on!
They were all here, mamma and your five sisters?"

"Four sisters! You don't care much for your family!"

"No more do you!"

"No more do I!"

"And they came here to condole with you on account of my brother's
discharge? Is that so?"

"Yes! And they were impertinent enough to say that I had no longer any
reason to be stuck up...."

"Proud, old girl!"

"They said _stuck up_. Personally I should never have condescended to
make use of such an expression."

"What did you say? I expect you gave them a piece of your mind?"

"You may depend on that! The old lady threatened never again to cross
our threshold."

"Did she really? Do you think she meant it?"

"No, I don't! But I'm certain that the old man...."

"You shouldn't speak of your father in that tone! Supposing somebody
heard you!"

"Do you think I should run that risk? However, the old man--between you
and me--will never come here again."

Falk pondered; after a while he resumed the conversation.

"Is your mother proud? Is she easily hurt? I'm always so afraid of
hurting people's feelings, as you know; you ought to tell me about her
weak points, so that I can take care."

"You ask me whether she is proud? You know; she is, in her own way.
Supposing, for instance, she was told that we had given a dinner-party
without asking her and my sisters, she would never come here again."

"Wouldn't she really?"

"You may depend upon it."

"It's extraordinary that people of her class----"

"What's that?"

"Oh, nothing; women are so sensitive! How's your association getting
on? What did you call it?"

"The Association for the Promotion of Women's Rights."

"What rights do you mean?"

"The wife shall have the right of disposing of her own property."

"Hasn't she got it already?"

"No, she hasn't."

"May I ask what your property is of which you are not allowed to
dispose?"

"Half of your's, old man! My dowry."

"The devil! Who taught you such rubbish?"

"It's not rubbish; it's the spirit of the age, my dear. The new law
should read like this: 'When a woman marries she becomes the owner of
half her husband's property, and of this half she can dispose as she
likes.'"

"And when she has run through it, the husband will have to keep her! I
should take jolly good care not to."

"Under the new law you would be forced to do so, or go to the
poor-house. This would be the penalty for a man who doesn't keep his
wife."

"Take care! You are going too far! But, have you any meetings? Who were
the women present? Tell me?"

"We are still busy with the statutes, with the preliminaries."

"But who are the women?"

"At present only Mrs. Homan, the controller's wife, and Lady
Rehnhjelm."

"Rehnhjelm? A very good name! I think I've heard it before. But didn't
you tell me you were going to float a Dorcas Society as well?"

"_Found_ a Dorcas Society! Oh, yes, and what d'you think? Pastor Skore
is coming one evening to read a paper."

"Pastor Skore is an excellent preacher and moves in good society. I'm
glad that you're keeping away from the lower classes. There's nothing
so fatal to man or woman as to form low connexions. My father always
said that; it was one of his strictest principles."

Mrs. Falk picked up the bread-crumbs from the tablecloth and dropped
them into her empty cup. Mr. Falk put his fingers into his waistcoat
pocket and brought out a tooth-pick with which he removed some tiny
atoms of coffee grounds lodged between his teeth.

Husband and wife felt self-conscious in each other's company. Each
guessed the thoughts of the other, and both realized that the first who
broke the silence would say something foolish and compromising. They
cast about for fresh subjects of conversation, mentally examined them
and found them unsuitable; every one of them had some connexion with
what had been said, or could be brought into connexion with it. Falk
would have liked to have reason for finding fault with the breakfast,
so as to have an excuse for expressing indignation; Mrs. Falk looked
out of the window, feebly hoping that there might be a change in the
weather--in vain.

A maid-servant entered and saved the situation by offering them a tray
with the newspapers, at the same time announcing Mr. Levin.

"Ask him to wait," said the master curtly.

For a few moments his boots squeaked up and down the room, preparing
the visitor who was waiting in the corridor for his arrival.

The trembling Levin, greatly impressed by the newly invented waiting in
the corridor, was ultimately conducted into the master's private room,
where he was received like a petitioner.

"Have you brought the bill of exchange with you?" asked Falk.

"I think so," replied the crestfallen Levin, producing a bundle of
guarantees and blank bills of various values. "Which bank do you
prefer? I have bills on all with the exception of one."

In spite of the grave character of the situation Falk could not help
smiling as he looked at the incomplete guarantees on which the name was
missing; the bills fully filled up with the exception of an acceptor's
name, and those completely filled up, which had not been accepted.

"Let's say the Ropemakers' Bank," he said.

"That's the one impossible one--I'm known there."

"Well, the Shoemakers' Bank, the Tailors' Bank, any one you like, only
do be quick about it."

They finally accepted the Joiners' Bank.

"And now," said Falk, with a look as if he had bought the other's soul,
"now you had better go and order a new suit; but I want you to order it
at a military tailor's, so that they will supply you later on with a
uniform on credit."

"Uniform? I don't want----"

"Hold your tongue, and do as you are told! It must be finished on
Thursday next, when I'm going to give a big party. As you know, I've
sold my shop and warehouse, and to-morrow I shall receive the freedom
of the city as a wholesale merchant."

"Oh! I congratulate you!"

"Hold your tongue when I'm speaking! You must go and pay a call now.
With your deceitful ways, your unrivalled capacity for talking
nonsense, you have succeeded in winning the good graces of my
mother-in-law. I want you to ask her what she thought of the party I
gave on Sunday last."

"Did you...."

"Hold your tongue and do as I tell you! She'll be jealous and ask you
whether you were present. Of course you weren't, for there was no
party. You'll both express discontent, become good friends and slander
me; I know you're an expert at it. But you must praise my wife. Do you
understand?"

"No; not quite."

"Well, it's not necessary that you should; all you've got to do is to
carry out my orders. Another thing--tell Nyström that I've grown so
proud that I don't want to have anything more to do with him. Tell him
that straight out; you'll be speaking the truth for once! No! Hold on!
We'll postpone that! You'll go to him, speak of the importance of next
Thursday; paint for him the great advantages, the many benefits, the
brilliant prospects, and so on. You understand me!"

"I understand."

"Then you take the manuscript to the printers' and--then...."

"We'll kick him out!"

"If you like to call it that, I have no objection."

"And am I to read the verses to your guests and distribute them?"

"Hm--yes! And another thing! Try to meet my brother; find out all you
can about his circumstances and friends! Make up to him, worm yourself
into his confidence--the latter's an easy job--become his friend! Tell
him that I've cheated him, tell him that I am proud, and ask him how
much he'll take for changing his name."

A tinge of green, representing a blush, spread over Levin's pale face.

"That's ugly," he said.

"What? And besides--one thing more! I'm a business man and I like order
in all my transactions. I guarantee such and such a sum; I must pay
it--that's clear!"

"Oh, no!"

"Don't talk rubbish! I have no security in case of death. Just sign
this bond made out to the holder and payable at sight. It's merely a
formality."

At the word _holder_ a slight tremor shook Levin's body, and he seized
the pen hesitatingly, although he well knew that retreat was
impossible. In imagination he saw a row of shabby, spectacled men,
carrying canes in their hands, their breast-pockets bulging with
stamped documents; he heard knocking at doors, running on stairs,
summonses, threats, respite; he heard the clock on the town hall
striking as the men shouldered their canes and led him--with clogged
feet--to the place of execution, where he himself was finally released,
but where his honour as a citizen fell under the executioner's axe amid
the delighted shouts of the crowd. He signed. The audience was over.




CHAPTER X

THE NEWSPAPER SYNDICATE "GREY BONNET"


For forty years Sweden had worked for the right which every man obtains
when he comes of age. Pamphlets had been written, newspapers founded,
stones thrown, suppers eaten and speeches made; meetings had been held,
petitions had been presented, the railways had been used, hands had
been pressed, volunteer regiments had been formed; and so, in the end,
with a great deal of noise, the desired object had been attained.
Enthusiasm was great and justifiable. The old birchwood tables at the
Opera Restaurant were transformed into political tribunes; the fumes of
the reform-punch attracted many a politician, who, later on, became a
great screamer; the smell of reform cigars excited many an ambitious
dream which was never realized; the old dust was washed off with reform
soap; it was generally believed that everything would be right now; and
after the tremendous uproar the country lay down and fell asleep,
confidently awaiting the brilliant results which were to be the outcome
of all this fuss.

It slept for a few years, and when it awoke it was faced by a reality
which suggested a miscalculation. There were murmurs here and there;
the statesmen who had recently been lauded to the skies were now
criticized. There were even, among the students, some who discovered
that the whole movement had originated in a country which stood in very
close relationship to the promoter of the Bill, and that the original
could be found in a well-known handbook. But enough of it!
Characteristic of these days was a certain embarrassment which soon
took the form of universal discontent or, as it was called, opposition.
But it was a new kind of opposition; it was not, as is generally the
case, directed against the Government, but against Parliament. It was a
Conservative opposition including Liberals as well as Conservatives,
young men as well as old; there was much misery in the country.

Now it happened that the newspaper syndicate _Grey Bonnet_, born and
grown up under Liberal auspices, fell asleep when it was called upon to
defend unpopular views--if one may speak of the views of a syndicate.
The directors proposed at the General Meeting that certain opinions
should be changed, as they had the effect of decreasing the number of
subscribers, necessary to the continuance of the enterprise. The
General Meeting agreed to the proposition, and the _Grey Bonnet_ became
a Conservative paper. But there was a _but_, although it must be
confessed that it did not greatly embarrass the syndicate; it was
necessary to have a new chief editor to save the syndicate from
ridicule; that no change need be made so far as the invisible editorial
staff was concerned, went without saying. The chief editor, a man of
honour, tendered his resignation. The editorial management, which had
long been abused on account of its red colour, accepted it with
pleasure, hoping thereby, without further trouble, to take rank as a
better class paper. There only remained the necessity of finding a new
chief editor. In accordance with the new programme of the syndicate, he
would have to possess the following qualifications: he must be known as
a perfectly trustworthy citizen; must belong to the official class;
must possess a title, usurped or won, which could be elaborated if
necessity arose. In addition to this he must be of good appearance, so
that one could show him off at festivals and on other public
occasions; he must be dependent; a little stupid, because true
stupidity always goes hand in hand with Conservative leanings; he must
be endowed with a certain amount of shrewdness, which would enable him
to know intuitively the wishes of his chiefs and never let him forget
that public and private welfare are, rightly understood, one and the
same thing. At the same time he must not be too young, because an older
man is more easily managed; and finally, he must be married, for the
syndicate, which consisted of business men, knew perfectly well that
married slaves are more amenable than unmarried ones.

The individual was discovered, and he was to a high degree endowed with
all the characteristics enumerated. He was a strikingly handsome man
with a fairly fine figure and a long, wavy beard, hiding all the weak
points of his face, which otherwise would have given him away. His
large, full, deceitful eyes caught the casual observer and inspired his
confidence, which was then unscrupulously abused. His somewhat veiled
voice, always speaking words of love, of peace, of honour and above all
of patriotism, beguiled many a misguided listener, and brought him to
the punch table where the excellent man spent his evenings, preaching
straightforwardness and love of the Mother Country.

The influence which this man of honour exerted on his evil environment
was marvellous; it could not be seen, but it could be heard. The whole
pack, which for years had been let loose on everything time-honoured
and venerable, which had not even let alone the higher things, was now
restrained and full of love--not only for its old friends--was now--and
not merely in its heart--moral and straightforward. They carried out in
every detail the programme drawn up by the new editor on his accession,
the cardinal points of which, expressed in a few words, were: to
persecute all good ideas if they were new, to fight for and uphold all
bad ones if they were old, to grovel before those in power, to extol
all those on whom fortune was smiling, to push down all those who
strove to rise, to adore success and abuse misfortune. Freely
translated the programme read: to acknowledge and cheer only the tested
and admittedly good, to work against the mania of innovation, and to
persecute severely, but justly, everybody who was trying to get on by
dishonest means, for honest work only should be crowned with success.

The secret of the last clause which the editorial staff had principally
at heart was not difficult to discover. The staff consisted entirely of
people whose hopes had been disappointed in one way or another; in most
cases by their own fault--through drinking and recklessness. Some of
them were "college geniuses," who in the past had enjoyed a great
reputation as singers, speakers, poets or wits, and had then justly--or
according to them unjustly--been forgotten. During a number of years it
had been their business to praise and promote, frequently against their
own inclination, everything that was new, all the enterprises started
by reformers; it was, therefore, not strange that now they seized the
opportunity to attack--under the most honourable pretexts--everything
new, good or bad.

The chief editor in particular was great in tracking humbug and
dishonesty. Whenever a delegate opposed a Bill which tended to injure
the interests of the country for the sake of the party, he was
immediately taken to task and called a humbug, trying to be original,
longing for a ministerial dress-coat; he did not say portfolio, for he
always thought of clothes first. Politics, however, was not his strong,
or rather his weak point, but literature. In days long past, on the
occasion of the Old Norse Festival at Upsala, he had proposed a toast
in verse on woman, and thereby furnished an important contribution to
the literature of the world; it was printed in as many provincial
papers as the author considered necessary for his immortality. This
had made him a poet, and when he had taken his degrees, he bought a
second-class ticket to Stockholm, in order to make his début in the
world and receive his due. Unfortunately the Stockholmers do not read
provincial papers. The young man was unknown and his talent was not
appreciated. As he was a shrewd man--his small brain had never been
exuberantly imaginative--he concealed his wound and allowed it to
become the secret of his life.

The bitterness engendered by the fact that his honest work, as he
called it, remained unrewarded specially qualified him for the post of
a literary censor; but he did not write himself: his position did not
allow him to indulge in efforts of his own, and he preferred leaving it
to the reviewer who criticized everybody's work justly and with
inflexible severity. The reviewer had written poetry for the last
sixteen years under a pseudonym. Nobody had ever read his verses and
nobody had taken the trouble to discover the author's real name. But
every Christmas his verses were exhumed and praised in the _Grey
Bonnet_, by a third party, of course, who signed his article so that
the public should not suspect that the author had written it
himself--it was taken for granted that the author was known to the
public. In the seventeenth year, the author considered it advisable to
put his name to a new book--a new edition of an old one. As misfortune
would have it, the _Red Cap_, the whole staff of which was composed of
young people who had never heard the real name, treated the author as a
beginner, and expressed astonishment, not only that a young writer
should put his name to his first book, but also that a young man's book
could be so monotonous and old-fashioned. This was a hard blow; the old
"pseudonymus" fell ill with fever, but recovered after having been
brilliantly rehabilitated by the _Grey Bonnet_; the latter went for the
whole reading public in a lump, charging it with being immoral and
dishonest, unable to appreciate an honest, sound, and moral book which
could safely be put into the hands of a child. A comic paper made fun
of the last point, so that the "pseudonymus" had a relapse, and, on his
second recovery, vowed annihilation to all native literature which
might appear in future; it did, however, not apply to quite all native
literature, for a shrewd observer would have noticed that the _Grey
Bonnet_ frequently praised bad books; true, it was often done lamely
and in terms which could be read in two ways. The same shrewd observer
could have noticed that the miserable stuff in question was always
published by the same firm; but this did not necessarily imply that the
reviewer was influenced by extraneous circumstances, such as little
lunches, for instance; he and the whole editorial staff were upright
men who would surely not have dared to judge others with so much
severity if they themselves had not been men of irreproachable
character.

Another important member of the staff was the dramatic critic. He had
received his education and qualified at a recruiting bureau in
X-köping; had fallen in love with a "star" who was only a "star" in
X-köping. As he was not sufficiently enlightened to differentiate
between a private opinion and a universal verdict, it happened to him
when he was for the first time let loose in the columns of the _Grey
Bonnet_ that he slated the greatest actress in Sweden, and maintained
that she copied Miss----, whatever her name was. That it was done very
clumsily goes without saying, and also that it happened before the
_Grey Bonnet_ had veered round. All this made his name detested and
despised; but still, he had a name, and that compensated him for the
indignation he excited. One of his cardinal points, although not at
once appreciated, was his deafness. Several years went by before it was
discovered, and even then nobody could tell whether or no it had any
connexion with a certain encounter, caused by one of his notices, in
the foyer of the Opera House, one evening after the lights had been
turned down. After this encounter he tested the strength of his arm
only on quite young people; and anybody familiar with the
circumstances could tell by his critique when he had had an accident in
the wings, for the conceited provincial had read somewhere the
unreliable statement that Stockholm was another Paris, and had believed
it.

The art critic was an old academician who had never held a brush in his
hand, but was a member of the brilliant artists club "Minerva," a fact
which enabled him to describe works of art in the columns of his paper
before they were finished, thereby saving the reader the trouble of
forming an opinion of his own. He was invariably kind to his
acquaintances, and in criticizing an exhibition never forgot to mention
every single one of them. His practice, of many years' standing, of
saying something pretty about everybody--and how would he have dared to
do otherwise--made it child's play to him to mention twenty names in
half a column; in reading his reviews one could not help thinking of
the popular game "pictures and devices." But the young artists he
always conscientiously forgot, so that the public, which, for ten years
had heard none but the old names, began to despair of the future of
art. One exception, however, he had made, and made quite recently, in
an unpropitious hour; and in consequence of this exception there was
great excitement one morning in the editorial office of the _Grey
Bonnet_.

What had occurred was this: Sellén--the reader may remember this
insignificant name mentioned on a former, and not a particularly
important occasion--had arrived with his picture at the exhibition at
the very last moment. When it had been hung--in the worst possible
place--for the artist was neither a member of the Academy nor did he
possess the royal medal--the "professor of Charles IX" arrived; he had
been given this nickname because he never painted anything but scenes
from the life of Charles IX; the reason again for this was that a long
time ago he had bought at an auction a wine glass, a tablecloth, a
chair, and a parchment from the period of Charles IX; these objects he
had painted for twenty years, sometimes with, sometimes without, the
king. But he was a professor now and a knight of many orders, and so
there was no help for it. He was with the academician when his eye fell
on the silent man of the opposition and his picture.

"Here again, sir?" He put up his pince-nez. "And this, then, is the new
style! Hm! Let me tell you, sir! Believe the word of an old man: take
that picture away! Take it away! It makes me sick to look at it. You do
yourself the greatest service if you take it away. What do you say, old
fellow?"

The old fellow said that the exhibition of such a picture was an
impertinence, and that if the gentleman would take his kindly meant
advice, he would change his profession and become a sign-board painter.

Sellén replied mildly, but shrewdly, that there were so many able
people in that profession, that he had chosen an artistic career where
success could be obtained far more easily, as had been proved.

The professor was furious at this insolence; he turned his back on the
contrite Sellén with a threat which the academician translated into a
promise.

The enlightened Committee of Purchases had met--behind closed doors.
When the doors were opened again, six pictures had been bought for the
money subscribed by the public for the purpose of encouraging native
artists. The excerpt from the minutes which found its way into the
columns of the newspapers, was worded as follows:

"The Art Union yesterday bought the following pictures: (1) 'Water with
Oxen,' landscape by the wholesale merchant K. (2) 'Gustavus Adolphus at
the Fire of Magdeburg,' historical painting by the linen draper L. (3)
'A Child blowing its Nose,' genre-picture by lieutenant M. (4) 'S. S.
Bore in the Harbour,' marine picture by the shipbroker N. (5) 'Sylvan
Scene with Women,' landscape by the royal secretary O. (6) 'Chicken
with Mushrooms,' still-life by the actor P."

These works of art, which cost a thousand pounds each on an average,
were afterwards praised in the _Grey Bonnet_ in two three-quarter
columns at fifteen crowns each; that was nothing extraordinary, but the
critic, partly in order to fill up the space, and partly in order to
seize the right moment for suppressing a growing evil, attacked a bad
custom which was beginning to creep in. He referred to the fact that
young, unknown adventurers, who had run away from the academy without
study, were trying to pervert the sound judgment of the public by a
mere running after effect. And then Sellén was taken by the ears and
flogged, so that even his enemies found that his treatment was
unfair--and that means a great deal. Not only was he denied every trace
of talent and his art called humbug; even his private circumstances
were dragged before the public; the article hinted at cheap restaurants
where he was obliged to dine; at the shabby clothes he was forced to
wear; at his loose morals, his idleness; it concluded by prophesying in
the name of religion and morality that he would end his days in a
public institution unless he mended his ways while there was yet time.

It was a disgraceful act, committed in indifference and selfishness;
and it was little less than a miracle that a soul was not lost on the
night of the publication of that particular number of the _Grey
Bonnet_.

Twenty-four hours later the _Incorruptible_ appeared. It reflected on
the way in which public moneys were administered by a certain clique,
and mentioned the fact that at the last purchase of pictures, not a
single one had been bought which had been painted by an artist, but
that the perpetrators had been officials and tradesmen, impudent enough
to compete with the artists, although the latter had no other market;
it went on to say that these pirates lowered the standard and
demoralized the artists, whose sole endeavour would have to be to
paint as badly as they did if they did not want to starve. Then
Sellén's name was mentioned. His picture was the first soulfully
conceived work within the last ten years. For ten years art had been a
mere affair of colours and brushes; Sellén's picture was an honest
piece of work, full of inspiration and devotion, and entirely original;
a picture which could only have been produced by an artist who had met
the spirit of nature face to face. The critic enjoined the young artist
to fight against the ancients, whom he had already left a long way
behind, and exhorted him to have faith and hope, because he had a
mission to fulfil, etc.

The _Grey Bonnet_ foamed with rage.

"You'll see that that fellow will have success!" exclaimed the chief
editor. "Why the devil did we slate him quite so much! Supposing he
became a success now! We should cover ourselves with ridicule."

The academician vowed that he should not have any success, went home
with a troubled heart, referred to his books and wrote an essay in
which he proved that Sellén's art was humbug, and that the
_Incorruptible_ had been corrupted.

The _Grey Bonnet_ drew a breath of relief, but immediately afterwards
it received a fresh blow.

On the following day the morning papers announced the fact that his
Majesty had bought Sellén's "masterly landscape which, for days, had
drawn a large public to the Exhibition."

The _Grey Bonnet_ received the full fury of the gale; it was tossed
hither and thither, and fluttered like a rag on a pole. Should they
veer round or steer ahead? Both paper and critic were involved. The
chief editor decided, by order of the managing director, to sacrifice
the critic and save the paper. But how was it to be done? In their
extremity they remembered Struve. He was a man completely at home in
the maze of publicity. He was sent for. The situation was clear to him
in a moment, and he promised that in a very few days the barge should
be able to tack.

To understand Struve's scheme, it is necessary to know the most
important data of his biography. He was a "born student," driven to
journalism by sheer poverty. He started his career as editor of the
Socialist _People's Flag_. Next he belonged to the Conservative
_Peasants' Scourge_, but when the latter removed to the provinces with
inventory, printing plant and editor, the name was changed into
_Peasants' Friend_, and its politics changed accordingly. Struve was
sold to the _Red Cap_, where his knowledge of all the Conservative
tricks stood him in good stead; in the same way his greatest merit in
the eyes of the _Grey Bonnet_ was his knowledge of all the secrets of
their deadly foe, the _Red Cap_, and his readiness to abuse his
knowledge of them.

Struve began the work of whitewashing by starting a correspondence in
the _People's Flag_; a few lines of this, mentioning the rush of
visitors to the Exhibition, were reprinted in the _Grey Bonnet_. Next
there appeared in the _Grey Bonnet_ an attack on the academician; this
attack was followed by a few reassuring words signed "The Ed." which
read as follows: "Although we never shared the opinion of our art
critic with regard to Mr. Sellén's justly praised landscape, yet we
cannot altogether agree with the judgment of our respected
correspondent; but as, on principle, we open our columns to all
opinions, we unhesitatingly printed the above article."

The ice was broken. Struve, who had the reputation of having written on
every subject--except cufic coins--now wrote a brilliant critique of
Sellén's picture and signed it very characteristically Dixi. The _Grey
Bonnet_ was saved; and so, of course, was Sellén; but the latter was of
minor importance.




CHAPTER XI

HAPPY PEOPLE


It was seven o'clock in the evening. The band at Berns' was playing the
Wedding March from "A Midsummer Night's Dream," when to the
accompaniment of its inspiriting strains Olle Montanus made his entry
into the Red Room. None of the members had yet arrived. Olle looked
imposing. For the first time since his confirmation he was wearing a
high hat. He was dressed in a new suit, and his boots were without
holes; he had had a bath, had been newly shaved, and his hair was waved
as if he were going to a wedding. A heavy brass chain ornamented his
waistcoat, and his left waistcoat pocket bulged visibly. A sunny smile
lit up his features; he radiated kindness; one might have thought that
he wanted to help all the world with little loans. Taking off his
overcoat, no longer cautiously buttoned up, he took the centre of the
sofa in the background, opened his coat and tugged at his white shirt
front so that it rose with a crackle and stood out like an arch; at
every movement the lining of his waistcoat and trousers creaked. This
seemed to give him as much pleasure as the knocking of his boot against
the leg of the sofa. He pulled out his watch, his dear old turnip,
which for a year and a month's grace had been in the pawnbroker's
hands, and the two old friends both seemed to enjoy its liberty.

What had happened that this poor fellow should be so inexpressibly
happy? We know that he had not drawn the winner in a lottery, that he
had not inherited a fortune, that he had not been "honourably
mentioned," that he had not won the sweet happiness which baffles
description. What had happened then? Something very commonplace: he had
found work.

Sellén was the next to arrive. He wore a velvet jacket and
patent-leather boots; he carried a rug, a field-glass on a strap, and a
cane; a yellow silk handkerchief was knotted round his throat; his
hands were covered by flesh-coloured gloves and a flower blossomed in
his buttonhole. He was, as usual, cheerful and calm; his lean,
intelligent face betrayed no trace of the emotions undergone during the
last few days.

Sellén was accompanied by Rehnhjelm; the lad was unusually subdued; he
knew that his friend and patron was leaving him.

"Hallo! Sellén," said Olle, "you are happy at last, aren't you, old
chap?"

"Happy? What nonsense you are talking! I've sold a piece of work! The
first in five years! Is that so overwhelming?"

"But you must have read the papers! Your name's made!"

"Oh! I don't care the toss of a button for that! Don't imagine that I
care for such trifles. I know exactly how much I still have to learn
before I shall be anybody. Let's talk of it again in ten years' time,
Olle."

Olle believed half of what Sellén said and doubted the rest; his shirt
front crackled and the lining creaked so that Sellén's attention was
aroused.

"By the Lord Harry!" he burst out, "you are magnificent!"

"Think so? You look like a lion."

Sellén rapped his patent-leather boots with his cane, shyly smelt the
flower in his buttonhole, and looked indifferent. Olle pulled out his
watch to see whether it was not yet time for Lundell to arrive, which
gave Sellén an opportunity of sweeping the galleries with his
field-glass. Olle was permitted to feel the soft texture of the velvet
coat, while Sellén assured him that it was an exceptionally good
quality at the price; Olle could not resist asking the cost. Sellén
told him, and admired Olle's studs, which were made of shells.

Presently Lundell appeared; he, too, had been given a bone at the great
banquet; he was commissioned to paint the altar-piece for the church of
Träskola for a small sum; but this had not visibly affected his outward
appearance, unless, indeed, his fat cheeks and beaming face hinted at a
more generous diet.

Falk was with Lundell. He was grave, but he rejoiced, in the name of
the whole world sincerely rejoiced, that merit had found its just
reward.

"Congratulations, Sellén!" he said, "but it's no more than your due."

Sellén agreed.

"I have been painting just as well these last five years and all the
world has jeered; they were still jeering the day before yesterday, but
now! It's disgusting! Look at this letter which I received from the
idiot, the professor of Charles IX!"

All eyes opened wide and became keen, for it is gratifying to examine
the oppressor closely, have him--on paper at least--in one's hands, at
one's mercy.

"'My dear Mr. Sellén,'--Fancy that!--'Let me welcome you among
us'--he's afraid of me, the blackguard--'I have always appreciated your
talent'--the liar!--let's tear up the rag and forget all about him."

Sellén invited his friends to drink; he drank to Falk, and hoped that
his pen would soon bring him to the front. Falk became self-conscious,
blushed and promised to do his best when his time came; but he was
afraid that his apprenticeship would be a long one, and he begged his
friends not to lose patience with him if he tarried; he thanked Sellén
for his friendship, which had taught him endurance and renunciation.
Sellén begged him not to talk nonsense; where was the merit of
endurance when there was no other alternative? And where was the virtue
in renouncing what one had no chance of obtaining?

But Olle smiled a kindly smile, and his shirt front swelled with
pleasure, so that the red braces could be plainly seen; he drank to
Lundell and implored him to take an example from Sellén, and not forget
the Land of Promise in lingering over the fleshpots of Egypt. He
assured him that his friend, Olle, believed in his talent, that was to
say, when he was himself and painted according to his own light; but
whenever he humbugged and painted to please others he was worse than
the rest; therefore he should look upon the altar-piece as a pot boiler
which would put him into a position to follow his own inspiration in
art.

Falk tried to seize the opportunity of finding out what Olle thought of
himself and his own art, a puzzle which he had long vainly attempted to
solve, when Ygberg walked into the Red Room. Everybody eagerly invited
him to be his guest, for he had been forgotten during the last hot
days, and everyone was anxious to show him that it had not been out of
selfishness. But Olle searched in his right waistcoat pocket, and with
a movement which he was anxious to hide from all eyes he slipped a
rolled-up banknote into Ygberg's coat pocket; the latter understood and
acknowledged it by a grateful look.

Ygberg drank to Sellén; he said that one might consider, in one way,
that Sellén's fortune was made; but, on the other hand, one might
consider, with equal justification, that it was not so. Sellén was not
sufficiently developed; he still wanted many years' study, for art was
long, as he, Ygberg, had himself experienced. He had had nothing but
ill-luck, therefore nobody could suspect him of envying a man of
Sellén's reputation.

The envy which peered through Ygberg's words slightly clouded the sunny
sky; but it was only for a moment, for everybody realized that the
bitterness of a long, wasted life, must be held responsible for it.

All the more gladly Ygberg handed Falk a small newly printed essay, on
the cover of which he beheld with consternation the black portrait of
Ulrica Eleonora. Ygberg stated that he had delivered the manuscript on
the day stipulated. Smith had taken Falk's refusal with the greatest
calm, and was now printing Falk's poems.

To Falk's eyes the gas-jets lost their brilliancy; he sat plunged in
deep thought; his heart was too full to find vent in words. His poems
were to be printed at Smith's expense. This was proof that they were
not without merit! The thought was sufficient food for the whole
evening.

The evening passed quickly for the happy circle; the band ceased
playing and the light was turned out; they were obliged to leave, but,
finding the night far too young for breaking up, they strolled along
the quays, amid endless conversation and philosophical discussions,
until they were tired and thirsty. Lundell offered to take his friends
to see Marie, where they could have some beer.

They turned towards the north and came to a street which gave on a
fence; the fence enclosed a tobacco field, bordering on the open
country. They stopped before a two-storied brick-house with a gable
facing the street. From above the door grinned two sandstone faces
whose ears and shins were lost in fantastic scrolls. Between the heads
hung a sword and an axe. It was formerly the house of the executioner.

Lundell, apparently quite familiar with the neighbourhood, gave a
signal before one of the windows on the ground floor; the blind was
drawn up; the window opened, and a woman's head looked out; a voice
asked whether the caller was Albert? No sooner had Lundell owned to
this, his _nom de guerre_, than a girl opened the door and, on the
promise of silence, admitted the party. As the promise was readily
given, the Red Room was soon in her apartment, and introduced to her
under fictitious names.

The room was not a large one; it had once been the kitchen, and the
range was still standing in its place. The furniture consisted of a
chest of drawers, of a pattern usually found in servants' rooms; on the
drawers stood a looking-glass, swathed in a piece of white muslin;
above the glass hung a coloured lithograph, representing the Saviour on
the Cross. The chest was littered with small china figures, scent
bottles, a prayer book, and an ash tray, and with its looking-glass and
two lighted tallow candles seemed to form a little house altar. Charles
XV, surrounded by newspaper cuttings, mostly representing police
constables, those enemies of the Magdalenes, was riding on horseback on
the wall above the folding sofa, which had not yet been converted into
a bed. On the window-sill stood a stunted fuchsia, a geranium and a
myrtle--the proud tree of Aphrodite in the poor dwelling. A photograph
album lay on the work-table. On the first leaf was a picture of the
King, on the second and third papa and mamma--poor country folk; on the
fourth a student, the seducer; on the fifth, a baby; and on the sixth
the fiancé, a journeyman. This was her history, so like the history of
most of them. On a nail, close to the range, hung an elegant dress, a
velvet cloak, and a hat with feathers--the fairy disguise in which she
went out to catch young men. The fairy herself was a tall, ordinary
looking young woman of twenty-four. Recklessness and vigils had given
her face that white transparency which as a rule distinguishes the
untoiling rich, but her hands still showed traces of hard work. In her
pretty dressing-gown, with her flowing hair down her back, she was the
picture of a Magdalene; her manner was comparatively shy, but she was
merry and courteous and on her best behaviour.

The party split up into groups, continued the interrupted discussions
and started fresh ones. Falk, who now looked upon himself as a poet and
was determined to be interested in everything--be it ever so
banal--began a sentimental conversation with Marie, which she greatly
enjoyed, for she appreciated the honour of being treated like a human
being. As usual the talk drifted to her story and the motives which had
shaped her career. She did not lay stress on her first slip, "that was
hardly worth speaking about"; but all the blacker was her account of
the time she had spent as a servant, leading the life of a slave, made
miserable by the whims and scoldings of an indolent mistress, a life of
never-ending toil. No, the free life she was leading now was far
preferable.

"But when you are tired of it?"

"Then I shall marry Vestergren."

"Does he want you?"

"He's looking forward to the day; moreover, I am going to open a little
shop with the money I have saved. But so many have asked me that
question: 'Have you got any cigars?'"

"Oh, yes; here you are! But do you mind my talking about it?"

He took the album and pointed out the student--it is always a student,
with a white handkerchief round his neck, a white student's hat on his
knees, and a gauche manner, who plays Mephisto.

"Who is this?"

"He was a nice fellow."

"The seducer? What?"

"Oh! let it alone! I was every bit as much to blame, and it is always
so, my dear; both are to blame! Look, this is my baby. The Lord took
it, and I dare say it was for the best. But now let's talk about
something else. Who is that gay dog whom Albert has brought here
to-night? The one closest to the stove, by the side of the tall one,
whose head reaches up to the chimney?"

Olle, very much flattered by her attention, patted his wavy hair which,
after the many libations, was beginning to stand up again.

"That is assistant preacher Monsson," said Lundell.

"Ugh! A clergyman! I might have known it from the cunning look in his
eyes. Do you know that a clergyman came here last week? Come here,
Monsson, and let me look at you!"

Olle descended from his seat where he and Ygberg had been criticizing
Kant's Categorical Imperative. He was so accustomed to exciting the
curiosity of the sex that he immediately felt younger; he lurched
towards the lady whom he had already ogled and found charming. Twirling
his moustache, he asked in an affected voice, with a bow which he had
not learned at a dancing class:

"Do you really think, miss, that I look like a clergyman?"

"No, I see now that you have a moustache; your clothes are too clean
for an artisan--may I see your hand--oh! you are a smith!"

Olle was deeply hurt.

"Am I so very ugly, miss?" he asked pathetically.

Marie examined him for a moment.

"You are very plain," she said, "but you look nice."

"Oh, dear lady, if you only knew how you are hurting me! I have never
yet found a woman ready to love me, and yet I have met so many who
found happiness although they were plainer than I am. But woman is a
cursed riddle, which nobody can solve; I detest her."

"That's right, Olle," came a voice from the chimney, where Ygberg's
head was; "that's all right."

Olle was going back to the stove, but he had touched on a topic which
interested Marie too much to allow it to drop; he had played on a
string the sound of which she knew. She sat down by his side and soon
they were deep in a long-winded and grave discussion--on love and
women.

Rehnhjelm, who during the whole evening had been more quiet and
restrained than usual, and of whom nobody could make anything, suddenly
revived and was now sitting in the corner of the sofa near Falk.
Obviously something was troubling him, something which he could not
make up his mind to mention. He seized his beer-glass, rapped on the
table as if he wanted to make a speech, and when those nearest to him
looked up ready to listen to him, he said in a tremulous and
indifferent voice:

"Gentlemen, you think I am a beast, I know; Falk, I know you think me a
fool, but you shall see, friends--the devil take me, you shall see!"

He raised his voice and put his beer-glass down with such determination
that it broke in pieces, after which he sank back on the sofa and fell
asleep.

This scene, although not an uncommon one, had attracted Marie's
attention. She dropped the conversation with Olle, who, moreover, had
begun to stray from the purely abstract point of the question and rose.

"Oh! what a pretty boy!" she exclaimed. "How does he come to be with
you? Poor little chap! How sleepy he is! I hadn't seen him before."

She pushed a cushion under his head and covered him with a shawl.

"How small his hands are! Far smaller than yours, you country louts!
And what a face! How innocent he looks! Albert, did you make him drink
so much?"

Whether it had been Lundell or another was a matter of no importance
now; the man was drunk. But it also was a fact that he did not need any
urging to drink. He was consumed by a constant longing to still an
inner restlessness which seemed to drive him away from his work.

The remarks made by his pretty friend had not perturbed Lundell; but
now his increasing intoxication excited his religious feelings, which
had been blunted by a luxurious supper. And as the intoxication began
to be general, he felt it incumbent on him to remind his companions of
the significance of the day and the impending leave-taking. He rose,
filled his glass, steadied himself against the chest of drawers and
claimed the attention of the party.

"Gentlemen,"--he remembered Magdalene's presence--"and ladies! We have
eaten and drunk to-night with--to come to the point--an intent which,
if we set aside the material which is nothing but the low, sensual
animal component of our nature--that in a moment like this when the
hour of parting is imminent--we have here a distressing example of the
vice which we call drunkenness! Doubtless, it arouses all one's
religious emotion if, after an evening spent in a circle of friends,
one feels moved to propose a glass to him who has shown more than
ordinary talent--I am speaking of Sellén--one should think that
self-respect should to a certain extent prevail. Such an example, I
maintain, has been manifested here, in higher potency, and therefore I
am reminded of the beautiful words which will never cease ringing in my
ears as long as I am able to think, and I am convinced they are now in
the mind of each one of us, although this spot is anything but
suitable. This young man, who has fallen a victim to the vice which we
will call drunkenness, has unfortunately crept into our circle and--to
cut my speech short--matured a sadder result than anybody could have
expected. Your health, noble friend Sellén! I wish you all the
happiness which your noble heart deserves! Your health, Olle Montanus!
Falk, too, has a noble heart, and will come to the front when his
religious sense has acquired the vigour which his character
foreshadows. I won't mention Ygberg, for he has at last come to a
decision, and we wish him luck in the career upon which he has so
splendidly entered--the philosophical career. It is a difficult one,
and I repeat the words of the psalmist: Who can tell? At the same time
we have every reason to hope for the best in the future, and I believe
that we can count on it as long as our sentiments are noble and our
hearts are not striving for worldly gain; for, gentlemen, a man without
religion is a beast. I therefore ask every gentleman here present to
raise his glass and empty it to all that is noble, beautiful, and
splendid, and for which we are striving. Your health, gentlemen!"

Religious emotion now overwhelmed Lundell to such a degree that it was
thought best to break up the party.

Daylight had been shining through the window-blind for some time and
the landscape with the castle and the maiden stood out brilliantly in
the first radiance of the morning sun. When the blind was drawn up, day
rushed in and illuminated the faces of those nearest the window; they
were deadly pale. The red light of the tallow candles fell with
magnificent effect on the face of Ygberg, who was sitting on the stove,
clutching his glass. Olle was proposing toasts to women, the spring,
the sun, the universe, throwing open the window, to give vent to his
feelings. The sleepers were roused, the party took their leave of
Marie, and filed through the front door.

When they had reached the street, Falk turned round. Magdalene was
leaning out of the window; the rays of the sun fell on her pale face;
her long, black hair, which shone deep red in the sunlight, seemed to
trickle down her throat and over her shoulders and to be falling on the
street in little streams. Above her head hung the sword and the axe and
the two grinning faces; but in an apple tree on the other side of the
road perched a black and white fly-catcher, and sang its frenzied song
of joy that the night was over.




CHAPTER XII

MARINE INSURANCE SOCIETY "TRITON"


Levi was a young man born and educated for business and on the point of
establishing himself with the assistance of his wealthy father, when
the latter died, leaving nothing but a family totally unprovided for.

This was a great disappointment to the young man; he had reached an age
when he considered that he might stop working altogether and let others
toil for him. He was twenty-five and of good appearance.
Broad-shouldered and lean in the flank, his body seemed specially
adapted for wearing a frock-coat in the manner which he had much
admired in certain foreign diplomatists. Nature had arched his chest in
the most elegant fashion, so that he was capable of setting off to the
fullest advantage a four-buttoned shirt front, even in the very act of
sinking into an easy chair at the foot of a long Board-table occupied
by the whole Administrative Committee. A beautiful beard, parted in the
middle, gave his young face a sympathetic and trustworthy expression;
his small feet were made for walking on the Brussels carpet of a
Board-room, and his carefully manicured hands were particularly
suitable for very light work, such as the signing of his name,
preferably on a printed circular.

In the days which are now called the good days, although in reality
they were very bad ones for a good many people, the greatest discovery
of a great century was made, namely, that one could live more cheaply
and better on other people's money than on the results of one's own
efforts. Many, a great many, people had taken advantage of the
discovery, and as no patent law protected it, it was not surprising
that Levi should be anxious to profit by it, too, more particularly as
he had no money himself and no inclination to work for a family which
was not his own. He, therefore, put on his best suit one day and called
on his uncle Smith.

"Oh, indeed! You have an idea," said Smith, "Let's hear it! It's a good
thing to have ideas!"

"I have been thinking of floating a joint stock company."

"Very good. Aaron will be treasurer, Simon secretary, Isaac cashier,
and the other boys book-keepers; it's a good idea! Go on! What sort of
a company is it going to be?"

"I'm thinking of a marine insurance society."

"Indeed! So far so good; everybody has to insure his property when he
goes on a voyage. But your idea?"

"This _is_ my idea."

"I don't think much of it. We have the big society 'Neptune.' It's a
good society. Yours would have to be better if you intend to compete
with it. What would be the novelty in your society?"

"Oh! I understand! I should reduce the premiums and all the patrons of
the 'Neptune' would come to me."

"That's better! Very well, then, the prospectus which I would print
would begin in this way: 'As the crying need of reducing the marine
insurance premiums has long been felt, and it is only owing to the want
of competition that it has not yet been done, we, the undersigned, beg
to invite the public to take up shares in the new society.... What
name?"

"Triton."

"Triton? What sort of a chap was he?"

"He was a sea-god."

"All right, Triton. It will make a good poster! You can order it from
Ranch in Berlin, and we will reproduce it in my almanac 'Our Country.'
Now for the undersigned. First, of course, my name. We must have big,
well-sounding names. Give me the official almanac."

Smith turned over the leaves for some time.

"A marine insurance company must have a naval officer of high rank. Let
me see! An admiral."

"Oh! Those sort of people have no money!"

"Bless me! You don't know much about business, my boy! They are only
wanted to subscribe, not to pay up! And they receive their dividends
for attending the meetings and being present at the directors' dinners!
Here we have two admirals; one of them has the Commander's Ribbon of
the Polar Star, and the other one has the Russian Order of Anna. What
shall we do? I think we had better take the Russian, for there is
splendid marine insurance ground in Russia.... There!"

"But is it such a simple matter to get hold of these people?"

"Tut, tut! Next we want a retired minister of State! Yes! Well! They
are called Your Excellency! Yes! Good. And a Count! That's more
difficult! Counts have lots of money! And we must have a professor!
They have no money! Is there such a thing as a Professor of Navigation?
That would be a capital thing for our venture! Isn't there a School of
Navigation somewhere near the South Theatre? Yes? Very well! Everything
is as clear as possible to me. Oh! I nearly forgot the most important
point. We must have a legal man! A counsellor of a high court. Here he
is!"

"But we have no money yet!"

"Money? What's the use of money in company promoting? Doesn't the man
who insures his goods pay us money? What? Or do we pay him? No! Well
then, he pays with his premiums."

"But the original capital?"

"One issues debentures!"

"True, but there must be some cash!"

"One pays cash in debentures! Isn't that paying? Supposing I gave you a
cheque for a sum, any bank would cash it for you. Therefore, a cheque
is money. Very well! And is there a law which ordains that cash shall
mean bank-notes? If there were, what about private bank-notes?"

"How large should the capital be?"

"Very small! It's bad business to tie up large sums. A million! Three
hundred thousand in cash and the remainder in debentures."

"But--but--but! The three hundred thousand crowns surely must be in
bank-notes!"

"Good Lord in Heaven! Bank-notes? Notes are money! If you have notes,
well and good; if you haven't, it comes to the same thing. Therefore,
we must interest the small capitalists, who have nothing but
bank-notes."

"And the big ones? How do they pay?"

"In shares, debenture guarantees, of course. But that will be a matter
for later on. Get them to subscribe, and we'll see to the rest."

"And only three hundred thousand? One single great steamer costs as
much. Supposing we insured a thousand steamers?"

"A thousand? Last year the 'Neptune' issued forty-eight thousand
insurance policies, and did well out of it."

"All the worse, I say! But if--but if--matters should go wrong...."

"One goes into liquidation!"

"Liquidation?"

"Declares oneself insolvent! That's the proper term. And what does it
matter if the society becomes insolvent? It isn't you, or I, or he! But
one can also increase the number of shares, or issue debentures which
the Government may buy up in hard times at a good price."

"There's no risk then?"

"Not the slightest! Besides what have you got to lose? Do you possess
one farthing? No! Very well then! What do I risk? Five hundred crowns!
I shall only take five shares, you see! And five hundred is as much as
this to me!"

He took a pinch of snuff and the matter was settled.

      *       *       *       *       *

The society was floated and during the first ten years of its activity
it paid 6, 10, 10, 11, 20, 11, 5, 10, 36, and 20 per cent. The shares
were eagerly bought up, and, in order to enlarge the business, more
shares were issued; the new issue of shares was followed by a general
meeting of shareholders; Falk was sent to report it for the _Red Cap_,
whose assistant reporter he was.

When, on a sunny afternoon in June, he entered the Exchange, the hall
was already crowded with people. It was a brilliant assembly.
Statesmen, geniuses, men of letters, officers, and civil service men of
high rank; uniforms, dress-coats, orders, and ribbons; all those here
assembled had one big general interest! The advancement of the
philanthropic institution called marine insurance. It required a great
love to risk one's money for the benefit of the suffering neighbour
whom misfortune had befallen, but here was love! Falk had never seen
such an accumulation of it in one spot. Although not yet an entirely
disillusioned man, he could not suppress a feeling of amazement.

But he was even more amazed when he noticed the little blackguard
Struve, the former Socialist, creeping through the crowd like a
reptile, greeted, and sometimes addressed by distinguished people with
a familiar nod, a pressure of the hand or a friendly slap on the
shoulder. He saw a middle-aged man, wearing a ribbon belonging to a
high order, nodding to him, and he noticed that Struve blushed and
concealed himself behind an embroidered coat. This brought him into
Falk's vicinity, and the latter immediately accosted him and asked him
who the man was. Struve's embarrassment increased, but summoning up
all his impudence, he replied, "You ought to know that! He's the
president of the Board of Payment of Employés' Salaries." No sooner had
the words left his lips than he pretended to be called to the other
side of the room; but he was in so great a hurry that Falk wondered
whether he felt uncomfortable in his society? A blackguard in the
company of an honourable man!

The brilliant assembly began to be seated. But the president's chair
was still vacant. Falk was looking for the reporter's table, and when
he discovered Struve and the reporter for the _Conservative_ sitting at
a table on the right-hand side of the secretary he took his courage
into his hands and marched through the distinguished crowd; just as he
had reached the table, the secretary stopped him with a question. "For
which paper?" he asked. A momentary silence ensued. "For the _Red
Cap_," answered Falk, with a slight tremor in his voice; he had
recognized in the secretary the actuary of the Board of Payment of
Employés' Salaries. A half-stifled murmur ran through the room;
presently the secretary said in a loud voice: "Your place is at the
back, over there!" He pointed to the door and a small table standing
close to it.

Falk realized in a moment the significance of the word "Conservative,"
and also what it meant to be a journalist who was not a Conservative.
Boiling inwardly he retraced his footsteps, walking to his appointed
place through the sneering crowd; he stared at the grinning faces,
challenging them with burning eyes, when his glance met another glance,
quite in the background, close to the wall. The eyes, bearing a strong
resemblance to a pair of eyes now closed in death, which used to rest
on his face full of love, were green with malice and pierced him like a
needle; he could have shed tears of sorrow at the thought that a
brother could thus look at a brother.

He took his modest place near the door, for he was determined not to
beat a retreat. Very soon he was roused from his apparent calm by a
newcomer who prodded him in the back as he took off his coat and shoved
a pair of rubber overshoes underneath his chair. The newcomer was
greeted by the whole assembly which rose from their seats as one man.
He was the chairman of the Marine Insurance Society Limited "Triton,"
but he was something else beside this. He was a retired
district-marshal, a baron, one of the eighteen of the Swedish Academy,
an Excellency, a knight of many orders, etc. etc.

A rap with the hammer and amid dead silence the president whispered the
following oration: just delivered by him at a meeting of the Coal
Company Limited, in the hall of the Polytechnic.

"Gentlemen! Amongst all the patriotic and philanthropic enterprises
there are few--if any--of such a noble and beneficial nature as an
Insurance Society."

This statement was received with a unanimous "Hear! hear!" which,
however, made no impression on the district-marshal.

"What else is life but a struggle, a life and death struggle, one might
say, with the forces of Nature! There will be few among us who do not,
sooner or later, come into conflict with them."

"Hear! hear!"

"For long ages man, more especially primitive man, has been the sport
of the elements; a ball tossed hither and thither, a glove blown here
and there by the wind like a reed. This is no longer the case. I'm
correct in saying it is not. Man has determined to rebel; it is a
bloodless rebellion, though, and very different to the revolutions
which dishonourable traitors to their country have now and again
stirred up against their lawful rulers. No! gentlemen! I'm speaking of
a revolution against nature! Man has declared war to the natural
forces; he has said, 'Thus far shalt thou go and no farther!'"

"Hear! hear!" and clapping of hands.

"The merchant sends out his steamer, his brig, his schooner, his
barge, his yacht, and so forth. The gale breaks the vessel to pieces.
'Break away!' says the merchant, for he loses nothing. This is the
great aspect of the insurance idea. Imagine the position, gentlemen!
The merchant has declared war upon the storms of heaven--and the
merchant has won the day!"

A storm of applause brought a triumphant smile to the face of the great
man; he seemed thoroughly to enjoy this storm.

"But, gentlemen, do not let us call an Insurance Institution a
business. It is not a business; we are not business men. Far from it!
We have collected a sum of money and we are ready to risk it. Is this
not so, gentlemen?"

"Yes, yes!"

"We have collected a sum of money so as to have it ready to hand over
to him whom misfortune has befallen; his percentage--I think he pays 1
per cent.--cannot be called a contribution; it is called a premium, and
rightly so. Not that we want any sort of reward--premium means
reward--for our little services, which we merely render because we are
interested--as far as I am concerned it is purely for this reason. I
repeat, I don't think--there can be any question that any one in our
midst would hesitate--I don't think that one of us would mind seeing
his contribution, if I may be allowed to call the shares by that name,
used for the furtherance of the idea."

"No! No!"

"I will now ask the Managing Director to read the annual report."

The director rose. He looked as pale as if he had been through a storm;
his big cuffs with the onyx studs could hardly hide the slight
trembling of his hand; his cunning eyes sought comfort and strength in
Smith's bearded face; he opened his coat and his expansive shirt front
swelled as if it were ready to receive a shower of arrows--and read:

"Truly, strange and unexpected are the ways of Providence...."

At the word Providence a considerable number of faces blanched, but the
district-marshal raised his eyes towards the ceiling as if he were
prepared for the worst (a loss of two hundred crowns).

"The year which we have just completed will long stand in our annals
like a cross on the grave of the accidents which have brought to scorn
the foresight of the wisest and the calculations of the most cautious."

The district-marshal buried his face in his hands as if he were
praying. Struve, believing that the white wall dazzled his eyes, jumped
up to pull down the blind, but the secretary had already forestalled
him.

The reader drank a glass of water. This caused an outburst of
impatience.

"To business! Figures!"

The district-marshal removed his hand from his eyes and was taken aback
when he found that it was so much darker than it had been before. There
was a momentary embarrassment and the storm gathered. All respect was
forgotten.

"To business! Go on!"

The director skipped the preliminary banalities, and plunged right into
the heart of the matter.

"Very well, gentlemen, I will cut my speech short!"

"Go on! Go on! Why the devil don't you?"

The hammer fell. "Gentlemen!" There was so much dignity in this brief
"Gentlemen" that the assembly immediately remembered their
self-respect.

"The Society has been responsible during the year for one hundred and
sixty-nine millions."

"Hear! hear!"

"And has received a million and a half in premiums."

"Hear! hear!"

Falk made a hasty calculation and found that if the full receipts in
premiums, namely, one million and a half, and the total original
capital, one million, were deducted, there remained about one hundred
and sixty-six millions for which the society was responsible. He
realized what "the ways of Providence" meant.

"Unfortunately the amount paid on policies was one million seven
hundred and twenty-eight thousand six hundred and seventy crowns and
eight öre."

"Shame!"

"As you see, gentlemen, Providence...."

"Leave Providence alone! Figures! Figures! Dividends!"

"Under the circumstances I can only propose, in my capacity as Managing
Director, a dividend of 5 per cent. on the paid-up capital."

Now a storm burst out which no merchant in the world could have
weathered.

"Shame! Impudence! Swindler! Five per cent! Disgusting! It's throwing
one's money away!"

But there were also a few more philanthropic utterances, such as: "What
about the poor, small capitalists who have nothing but their dividends
to live on? How'll they manage? Mercy on us, what a misfortune! The
State ought to help, and without delay! Oh dear! Oh dear!"

When the storm had subsided a little and the director could make his
voice heard, he read out the high praise given by the Supervisory
Committee to the Managing Director and all the employés who, without
sparing themselves, and with indefatigable zeal, had done the thankless
work. The statement was received with open scorn.

The report of the accountants was then read. They stated--after again
censuring Providence--that they had found all the books in good--not to
say excellent--order, and in checking the inventory all debentures on
the reserve fund had been found correct (!) They therefore called upon
the shareholders to discharge the directors and acknowledge their
honest and unremitting labour.

The directors were, of course, discharged.

The Managing Director then declared that under the circumstances he
could not think of accepting his bonus (a hundred crowns) and handed it
to the reserve fund. This declaration was received with applause and
laughter.

After a short evening prayer, that is to say a humble petition to
Providence that next year's dividend might be 20 per cent., the
district-marshal closed the proceedings.




CHAPTER XIII

DIVINE ORDINANCE


On the same afternoon on which her husband had attended the meeting of
the Marine Insurance Society "Triton," Mrs. Falk for the first time
wore a new blue velvet dress, with which she was eager to arouse the
envy of Mrs. Homan, who lived in the house opposite. Nothing was easier
or more simple; all she had to do was to show herself every now and
then at the window while she supervised the preparations in her room,
intended to "crush" her guests, whom she expected at seven. The
Administrative Committee of the Crèche "Bethlehem" was to meet and
examine the first monthly report; it consisted of Mrs. Homan, whose
husband, the controller, Mrs. Falk suspected of pride because he was a
Government official; Lady Rehnhjelm whom she suspected of the same
failing because of her title, and the Rev. Skore, who was private
chaplain of all the great families. The whole committee was to be
crushed and crushed in the sweetest possible manner.

The new setting for the scene had already been displayed at the big
party. All the old pieces which were neither antique nor possessed of
any artistic value had been replaced by brand new furniture. Mrs. Falk
intended to manage the actors in the little play until the close of the
proceedings, when her husband would arrive upon the scene with an
admiral--he had promised his wife at least an admiral in full-dress
uniform. Both were to crave admission to the society. Falk was to
enlarge the funds of the society on the spot by handing over to it a
part of the sum which he had been earning so easily as shareholder of
the "Triton."

Mrs. Falk had finished with the window and was now arranging the
rosewood table, inlaid with mother-of-pearl, on which the proofs of the
monthly report were to be laid. She dusted the agate inkstand, placed
the silver penholder on the tortoiseshell rack, turned up the seal of
the chrysoprase handle so as to hide her commoner's name, cautiously
shook the cash-box made of the finest steel wire, so that the value of
the few bank-notes it contained could be plainly read. Finally, having
given her last orders to the footman dressed up for the parade, she sat
down in her drawing-room in the careless attitude in which she desired
that the announcement of her friend, the controller's wife, should
discover her; Mrs. Homan would be sure to be the first to arrive.

She did arrive first. Mrs. Falk embraced Evelyn and kissed her on the
cheek, and Mrs. Homan embraced Eugenia, who received her in the
dining-room and retained her there for a few moments in order to ask
her opinion of the new furniture. Mrs. Homan wasted no time on the
solid oak sideboard dating from the time of Charles XII, with the tall
Japanese vases, because she felt small by the side of it; she looked at
the chandelier which she found too modern, and the dining-table, which,
she said, was not in keeping with the prevailing style; in addition to
this she considered that the oleographs were out of place among the old
family portraits, and took quite a long time to explain the difference
between an oil painting and an oleograph. Mrs. Falk's new silk-lined
velvet dress swished against every corner within reach without
succeeding in attracting her friend's attention. She asked her whether
she liked the new Brussels carpet in the drawing-room; Mrs. Homan
thought it contrasted too crudely with the curtains; at last Mrs. Falk
felt annoyed with her and dropped her questions.

They sat down at the drawing-room table, clutching at life-buoys in the
guise of photographs, unreadable volumes of verse, and so on. A little
pamphlet fell into Mrs. Homan's hands; it was printed on gold-edged
pink paper and bore the title: "To the wholesale merchant Nicholas
Falk, on his fortieth birthday."

"Ah! These are the verses which were read at your party! Who wrote
them?"

"A very clever man, a friend of my husband's. His name's Nyström."

"Hm! How queer that his name should be quite unknown! Such a clever
man! But why wasn't he at your party?"

"Unfortunately he was ill, my dear; so he couldn't come."

"I see! But, my dear Eugenia, isn't it awfully sad about your
brother-in-law? I hear he's so very badly off."

"Don't mention him! He's a disgrace and a grief to the whole family!
It's terrible!"

"Yes; it was quite unpleasant when everybody asked about him at your
party. I was so sorry for you, dear...."

This is for the oak sideboard, dating from the time of Charles XII, and
the Japanese vases, thought the controller's wife.

"For me! Oh, please don't! You mean for my husband?" interrupted Mrs.
Falk.

"Surely, that's the same thing!"

"Not at all! I can't be held responsible for all the black sheep in his
family."

"What a pity it was that your parents, also, were ill and couldn't
come! How's your dear father?"

"Thanks. He's quite well again. How kind of you to think of everybody!"

"Well, one shouldn't think of oneself only! Is he delicate, the
old--what _is_ his title?"

"Captain, if you like."

"Captain! I was under the impression that my husband said he was--one
of the crew of the flagship, but very likely it's the same thing. But
where were the girls?"

That's for the Brussels carpet, mentally reflected the controller's
wife.

"They are so full of whims, they can never be depended on."

Mrs. Falk turned over the leaves in her photograph album; the binding
cracked; she was in a towering rage.

"I say, dear, who was the disagreeable individual who read the verses
on the night of your party?"

"You mean Mr. Levin; the royal secretary; he's my husband's most
intimate friend."

"Is he really? Hm! How strange! My husband's a controller in the same
office where he's a secretary; I don't want to vex you, or say anything
unpleasant; I never do; but my husband says that Levin's in such bad
circumstances that it's not wise for your husband to associate with
him."

"Does he? That's a matter of which I know nothing, and in which I don't
interfere, and let me tell you, my dear Evelyn, I never interfere in my
husband's affairs, though I've heard of people who do."

"I beg your pardon, dear, I thought I was doing you a service by
telling you."

That's for the chandelier and the dining-table. There only remains the
velvet dress.

"Well," the controller's wife took up the thread again, "I hear that
your brother-in-law...."

"Spare my feelings and don't talk of the creature!"

"Is he really such a bad lot? I've been told that he associates with
the worst characters in town...."

At this juncture Mrs. Falk was reprieved; the footman announced Lady
Rehnhjelm.

Oh! How welcome she was! How kind of her it was to come!

And Mrs. Falk really was pleased to see the old lady with the kindly
expression in her eyes; an expression only found in the eyes of those
who have weathered the storms of life with true courage.

"My dear Mrs. Falk," said her ladyship taking a seat; "I have all
sorts of kind messages for you from your brother-in-law."

Mrs. Falk wondered what she had done to the old woman that she, too,
evidently wanted to annoy her.

"Indeed?" she said, a little stiffly.

"He's a charming young man. He came to see my nephew to-day, at my
house; they are great friends! He really is an excellent young man!"

"Isn't he?" joined in Mrs. Homan, always ready for a change of front.
"We were just talking about him."

"Indeed? What I most admire in him is his courage in venturing on a
course where one easily runs aground; but we need have no apprehensions
so far as he is concerned; he's a man of character and principle. Don't
you agree with me, Mrs. Falk?"

"I've always said so, but my husband thinks differently."

"Oh! Your husband has always had peculiar views," interposed Mrs.
Homan.

"Is he a friend of your nephew's, Lady Rehnhjelm?" asked Mrs. Falk
eagerly.

"Yes, they both belong to a small circle, some of the members of which
are artists. You must have heard about young Sellén, whose picture was
bought by his Majesty?"

"Of course, I have! We went to the Exhibition on purpose to have a look
at it. Is he one of them?"

"Yes; they're often very hard up, these young fellows, but that's
nothing new in the case of young men who have to fight their way in the
world."

"They say your brother-in-law's a poet," went on Mrs. Homan.

"Oh, rather! He writes excellent verse! The academy gave him a prize;
the world will hear of him in time," replied Mrs. Falk with conviction.

"Haven't I always said so?" agreed Mrs. Homan.

And Arvid Falk's talents were enlarged upon, so that he had arrived in
the Temple of Fame when the footman announced the Rev. Nathanael Skore.
The latter entered hastily and hurriedly shook hands with the ladies.

"I must ask your indulgence for being so late," he said, "but I'm a
very busy man. I have to be at a meeting at Countess Fabelkrantz's at
half-past nine, and I have come straight from my work."

"Are you in a hurry then, dear pastor?"

"Yes, my wide activities give me no leisure. Hadn't we better begin
business at once?"

The footman handed round refreshments.

"Won't you take a cup of tea, pastor, before we begin?" asked the
hostess, smarting under the unpleasantness of a small disappointment.

The pastor glanced at the tray.

"Thank you, no; I'll take a glass of punch, if I may. I've made it a
rule, ladies, never to differ from my fellow-creatures in externals.
Everybody drinks punch; I don't like it, but I don't want the world to
say that I'm better than anybody else; boasting is a failing which I
detest. May I now begin with the proceedings?"

He sat down at the writing-table, dipped the pen into the ink and read:

"'Account of the Presents received by the Administrative Committee of
the Crèche "Bethlehem" during the month of May: Signed Eugenia Falk.'"

"Née, if I may ask?"

"Oh, never mind about that," said Mrs. Falk.

"Evelyn Homan."

"Née, if I may make so bold?"

"Von Bähr, dear pastor."

"Antoinette Rehnhjelm."

"Née, madame?"

"Rehnhjelm, pastor."

"Ah! true! You married your cousin, husband dead, no children. But to
continue: Presents...."

There was a general--almost general--consternation.

"But won't you sign, too, pastor?" asked Mrs. Homan.

"I dislike boasting, ladies, but if it's your wish! Here goes!"

"Nathanael Skore."

"Your health, pastor! Won't you drink a glass of punch before we
begin?" asked the hostess with a charming smile, which died on her lips
when she looked at the pastor's glass. It was empty; she quickly filled
it.

"Thank you, Mrs. Falk, but we mustn't be immoderate! May I begin now?
Please check me by the manuscript."

"'Presents: H.M. the Queen, forty crowns. Countess Fabelkrantz, five
crowns and a pair of woollen stockings. Wholesale merchant Schalin, two
crowns, a packet of envelopes, six steel nibs, and a bottle of ink.
Miss Amanda Libert, a bottle of eau-de-Cologne. Miss Anna Feif, a pair
of cuffs. Charlie, twopence halfpenny from his money box. Johanna
Pettersson, half-dozen towels. Miss Emily Björn, a New Testament.
Grocer Persson, a bag of oatmeal, a quart of potatoes, and a bottle of
pickled onions. Draper Scheike, two pairs of woollen under....'"

"May I ask the meeting whether all this is to be printed?" interrupted
her ladyship.

"Well, of course," answered the pastor.

"Then I must resign my post on the Administrative Committee."

"But do you imagine, Lady Rehnhjelm, that the society could exist on
voluntary contributions if the names of the donors did not appear in
print? Impossible!"

"Is charity to shed its radiance on petty vanity?"

"No, no! Don't say that! Vanity is an evil, certainly; we turn the evil
into good by transforming it into charity. Isn't that praiseworthy?"

"Oh, yes! But we mustn't call petty things by high-sounding names. If
we do, we are boastful!"

"You are very severe, Lady Rehnhjelm! Scripture exhorts us to pardon
others; you should pardon their vanity."

"I'm ready to pardon it in others but not in myself. It's pardonable
and good that ladies who have nothing else to do should find pleasure
in charity; but it's disgraceful if they call it a good action seeing
that it is only their pleasure and a greater pleasure than most others
on account of the wide publicity given to it by printing."

"Oh!" began Mrs. Falk, with the full force of her terrible logic, "do
you mean to say that doing good is disgraceful, Lady Rehnhjelm?"

"No, my dear; but in my opinion it is disgraceful to print the fact
that one has given a pair of woollen stockings...."

"But to give a pair of woollen stockings is doing good; therefore it
must be disgraceful to do good...."

"No, but to have it printed, my child! You aren't listening to what I'm
saying," replied her ladyship, reproving her stubborn hostess who would
not give in, but went on:

"I see! It's the printing which is disgraceful! But the Bible is
printed, consequently it is disgraceful to print the Bible...."

"Please go on, pastor," interrupted her ladyship, a little annoyed by
the tactless manner in which her hostess defended her inanities; but
the latter did not yet count the battle as lost.

"Do you think it beneath your dignity, Lady Rehnhjelm, to exchange
views with so unimportant a person as I am...?"

"No, my child; but keep your views to yourself; I don't want to
exchange."

"Do you call this discussing a question, may I ask? Won't you enlighten
us on the point, pastor? Can it be called discussing a question if one
party refuses to reply to the argument of the other?"

"Of course it can't, my dear Mrs. Falk," replied the pastor, with an
ambiguous smile, which nearly reduced Mrs. Falk to tears. "But don't
let us spoil a splendid enterprise by quarrelling over trifles,
ladies! We'll postpone the printing until the funds are larger. We
have seen the young enterprise shooting up like a seed and we have seen
that powerful hands are willing to tend the young plant; but we must
think of the future. The Society has a fund; the fund must be
administered; in other words, we must look round for an administrator,
a practical man, able to transform these presents into hard cash; we
must elect a treasurer. I'm afraid we shall not find one without a
sacrifice of money--does one ever get anything without such a
sacrifice? Have the ladies anybody in view?"

No, the ladies had not thought of it.

"Then may I propose a young man of steady character, who in my opinion
is just the right person for the work? Has the Administrative Committee
any objection to appointing secretary Ekelund to the post of treasurer
at a suitable salary?"

The ladies had no objection to make, especially as the young man was
recommended by the Rev. Nathanael Skore; and the Pastor felt the more
qualified to recommend him because he was a near relative of his. And
so the Crèche had a treasurer with a salary of six hundred crowns.

"Ladies," began the pastor again, "have we worked long enough in the
vineyard for one day?"

There was silence. Mrs. Falk stared at the door wondering where her
husband was.

"My time's short and I'm prevented from staying any longer. Has anybody
any further suggestion to make? No! In calling down the blessing of the
Lord on our enterprise, which has begun so auspiciously, I commend all
of us to His loving mercy; I cannot do it in a better way than by
repeating the words which He Himself has taught us when He prayed:
'Abba, Father--Our Father....'"

He was silent as if he were afraid of the sound of his own voice, and
the Committee covered their faces with their hands as if they were
ashamed of looking each other in the eyes. The ensuing pause grew
long, unbearably long; yet no one dared to break it; every one looked
through the fingers hoping that someone else would make the first move,
when a violent pull at the front door bell brought the party down to
earth.

The pastor took his hat and emptied his glass; there was something
about him of a man who is trying to steal away. Mrs. Falk beamed, for
here was the crushing, the vengeance, the rehabilitation.

Revenge was there and the crushing too, for the footman handed her a
letter from her husband which contained--the guests were not
enlightened as to its contents, but they saw enough to make them
declare at once that they had pressing engagements.

Lady Rehnhjelm would have liked to stay and comfort her young hostess,
whose appearance betrayed a high degree of consternation and
unhappiness. The latter, however, did not encourage her, but on the
contrary was so exceedingly eager to help her visitors with their hats
and cloaks that it looked as if she wanted to be rid of them as quickly
as possible.

They parted in great embarrassment. The footsteps died away on the
staircase and the departing guests could tell from the nervous haste
with which the hostess shut the door behind them that she longed for
solitude in order to be able to give vent to her feelings.

It was quite true. Left by herself in the large rooms Mrs. Falk burst
into violent sobs; but her tears were not the tears which fall like a
May shower on a wizened old heart; they were the tears of wrath and
rage which darken the mirror of the soul and fall like an acid on the
roses of health and youth and wither them.




CHAPTER XIV

ABSINTH


A hot afternoon sun was scorching the pavements of the provincial town
X-köping.

The large vaults of the town hall were still deserted; fir branches
were scattered all over the floor, and it smelt of a funeral. The
graduated liqueur bottles stood on the shelves, having an afternoon
nap, opposite the brandy bottles which wore the collars of their orders
round their necks and were on leave until the evening; the clock, which
could never take a nap, stood against the wall like a tall peasant,
whiling away the time by contemplating, apparently, a huge playbill,
impaled on a clothes peg close by. The vault was very long and narrow;
both of the long walls were furnished with birchwood tables, jutting
out from the wall, giving it the appearance of a stable, in which the
four-legged tables represented the horses tied with their heads to the
wall and turning their hind quarters towards the room; at the present
moment all of them were asleep; one of them lifted its hind leg a
little off the ground, for the floor was very uneven. One could see
that they were fast asleep, for the flies were calmly walking up and
down their backs.

The sixteen-year-old waiter who was leaning against the tall clock
close to the poster was not asleep; he was incessantly waving his white
apron at the flies which had just finished their dinner in the kitchen
and were now playing about the vaults. Every now and then he leaned
back and put his ear to the chest of the clock, as if he were sounding
it, or wanting to find out what it had had for dinner. He was soon to
be enlightened. The tall creature gave a sob, and exactly four minutes
later it sobbed again; a groaning and rumbling in its inside made the
lad jump; rattling terribly it struck six times, after which it
continued its silent work.

The boy, too, began to work. He walked round his stable, grooming his
horses with his apron and putting everything in order as if he were
expecting visitors. On one of the tables, in the background, from which
a spectator could view the whole long room, he placed matches, a bottle
of absinth and two glasses, a liqueur glass and a tumbler; then he
fetched a bottle of water from the pump and put it on the table by the
side of the inflammables. When everything was ready, he paced up and
down the room, occasionally striking quite unexpected attitudes, as if
he were imitating somebody. Now he stood with arms folded across his
chest, his head bowed, staring fiercely at the faded paper on the old
walls; now he stood with legs crossed, the knuckles of his right hand
touching the edge of the table holding in his left a lorgnette, made of
a piece of wire from a beer bottle through which he sarcastically
scanned the mouldings on the ceiling.

The door flew open, and a man of thirty-five entered with assurance, as
if he were coming into his own house. His beardless face had the
sharply cut features which are the result of much exercise of the
facial muscles, characteristic of actors and one other class. Every
muscle and ligament was plainly visible under the skin with its bluish
shadows on upper lip and chin, but the miserable wire-work which set
these fine tangents in motion was invisible, for he was not like a
common piano which requires a pedal. A high, rather narrow forehead
with hollow temples, rose like a true Corinthian capital; black, untidy
locks of hair climbed round it like wild creepers, from which small
straight snakes darted, trying to reach the sockets of his eyes, but
ever failing to do so. In calm moments his large, dark eyes looked
gentle and sad, but there were times when they blazed and then the
pupils looked like the muzzles of a revolver.

He took his seat at the table which the boy had prepared and looked
sadly at the water bottle.

"Why do you always give me a bottle of water, Gustav?"

"So that you won't be burned to death, sir."

"What does it matter to you whether I am or not? Can't I burn if I
like?"

"Don't be a nihilist to-day, sir."

"Nihilist? Who talked to you of nihilists? When did you hear that word?
Are you mad, boy? Speak!"

He rose to his feet and fired a few shots from his dark revolvers.

Fear and consternation at the expression in the actor's face kept
Gustav tongue tied.

"Answer, boy, when did you hear this word?"

"Mr. Montanus said it a few days ago, when he came here from his
church," answered the boy timidly.

"Montanus, indeed!" said the melancholy man, sitting down again.
"Montanus is my man: he has a large understanding. I say, Gustav,
what's the name, I mean the nickname, by which these theatrical
blackguards call me? Tell me! You needn't be afraid."

"I'd rather not, sir; it's very ugly."

"Why not if you can please me by doing so? Don't you think I could do
with a little cheering up? Do I look so frightfully gay? Out with it!
What do they say when they ask you whether I have been here? Don't they
say: Has...."

"The devil...."

"Ah, the devil! They hate me, don't they?"

"Yes, they do!"

"Good! But why? Have I done them any harm?"

"No, they can't say that, sir."

"No, I don't think they can."

"But they say that you ruin people, sir."

"Ruin?"

"Yes, they say that you ruined me, sir, because I find that there's
nothing new in the world."

"Hm! Hm! I suppose you tell them that their jokes are stale?"

"Yes; everything they say is stale; they are so stale themselves that
they make me sick."

"Indeed! And don't you think that being a waiter is stale?"

"Yes, I do; life and death and everything is an old story--no--to be an
actor would be something new."

"No, my friend. That is the stalest of all stale stories. But shut up,
now! I want to forget myself."

He drank his absinth and rested his head against the wall with its
long, brown streak, the track on which the smoke of his cigar had
ascended during the six long years he had been sitting there, smoking.
The rays of the sun fell through the window, passing through the sieve
of the great aspens outside, whose light foliage, dancing in the
evening breeze, threw a tremulous net on the long wall. The shadow of
the melancholy man's head, with its untidy locks of hair, fell on the
lowest corner of the net and looked very much like a huge spider.

Gustav had returned to the clock, where he sat plunged in nihilistic
silence, watching the flies dancing round the hanging lamp.

"Gustav!" came a voice from the spider's web.

"Yes sir!" was the prompt response from the clock.

"Are your parents still alive?"

"No, sir, you know they aren't."

"Good for you."

A long pause.

"Gustav!"

"Yes sir!"

"Can you sleep at night?"

"What do you mean, sir?" answered Gustav blushing.

"What I say!"

"Of course I can! Why shouldn't I?"

"Why do you want to be an actor?"

"I don't know! I believe I should be happy!"

"Aren't you happy now?"

"I don't know! I don't think so!"

"Has Mr. Rehnhjelm been here again?"

"No, sir, but he said he would come here to meet you about this time."

A long pause; the door opened and a shadow fell into the spider's net;
it trembled, and the spider in the corner made a quick movement.

"Mr. Rehnhjelm?" said the melancholy head.

"Mr. Falander?"

"Glad to meet you! You came here before?"

"Yes; I arrived this afternoon and called at once. You'll guess my
purpose. I want to go on the stage."

"Do you really? You amaze me!"

"Amaze you?"

"Yes! But why do you come to me first?"

"Because I know that you are one of our finest actors and because a
mutual friend, Mr. Montanus, the sculptor, told me that you were in
every way to be trusted."

"Did he? Well, what can I do for you?"

"I want advice."

"Won't you sit down?"

"If I may act as host...."

"I couldn't think of such a thing."

"Then as my own guest, if you don't mind."

"As you like! You want advice?--Hm! Shall I give you my candid opinion?
Yes, of course! Then listen to me, take what I'm going to say
seriously, and never forget that I said such and such a thing on such
and such an evening; I'll be responsible for my words."

"Give me your candid opinion! I'm prepared for anything."

"Have you ordered your horses? No? Then do so and go home."

"Do you think me incapable of becoming an actor?"

"By no means! I don't think anybody in all the world incapable of that.
On the contrary! Everybody, has more or less talent for acting."

"Very well then!"

"Oh! the reality is so different from your dream! You're young, your
blood flows quickly through your veins, a thousand pictures, bright and
beautiful like the pictures in a fairy tale throng your brain; you want
to bring them to the light, show them to the world and in doing so
experience a great joy--isn't that so?"

"Yes, yes, you're expressing my very thoughts!"

"I only supposed quite a common case--I don't suspect bad motives
behind everything, although I have a bad opinion of most things! Well,
then, this desire of yours is so strong, that you would rather suffer
want, humiliate yourself, allow yourself to be sucked dry by vampires,
lose your social reputation, become bankrupt, go to the dogs--than turn
back. Am I right?"

"Yes! How well you know me!"

"I once knew a young man--I know him no longer, he is so changed! He
was fifteen years old when he left the penitentiary which every
community keeps for the children who commit the outrageous crime of
being born, and where the innocent little ones are made to atone for
their parents' fall from grace--for what should otherwise become of
society? Please remind me to keep to the subject! On leaving it he went
for five years to Upsala and read a terrible number of books; his brain
was divided into six pigeon-holes in which six kinds of information,
dates, names, a whole warehouseful of ready-made opinions, conclusions,
theories, ideas and nonsense of every description, were stored like a
general cargo. This might have been allowed to pass, for there's plenty
of room in a brain. But he was also supposed to accept foreign
thoughts, rotten, old thoughts, which others had chewed for a
life-time, and which they now vomited. It filled him with nausea
and--he was twenty years old--he went on the stage. Look at my watch!
Look at the second-hand; it makes sixty little steps before a minute
has passed; sixty times sixty before it is an hour; twenty-four times
the number and it is a day; three hundred and sixty-five times and it
is only a year. Now imagine ten years! Did you ever wait for a friend
outside his house? The first quarter of an hour passes like a flash!
The second quarter--oh! one doesn't mind waiting for a person one's
fond of; the third quarter: he's not coming; the fourth: hope and fear;
the fifth: one goes away but hurries back; the sixth: Damn it all! I've
wasted my time for nothing! the seventh: having waited so long, I might
just as well wait a little longer; the eighth: raging and cursing; the
ninth: One goes home, lies down on one's sofa and feels as calm as if
one were walking arm in arm with death. He waited for ten years! Ten
years! Isn't my hair standing on end when I say ten years? Look at it!
Ten years had passed before he was allowed to play a part. When he did,
he had a tremendous success--at once. But his ten wasted years had
brought him to the verge of insanity; he was mad that it hadn't
happened ten years before. And he was amazed to find that happiness
when at last he held it within his grasp didn't make him happy! And so
he was unhappy."

"But don't you think he required the ten years for the study of his
art?"

"How could he study it when he was never allowed to play? He was a
laughing-stock, the scum of the playbill; the management said he was no
good; and whenever he tried to find an engagement at another theatre,
he was told that he had no repertoire."

"But why couldn't he be happy when his luck had turned?"

"Do you think an immortal soul is content with happiness? But why speak
about it? Your resolution is irrevocable. My advice is superfluous.
There is but one teacher: experience, and experience is as capricious,
or as calculating, as a schoolmaster; some of the pupils are always
praised; others are always beaten. You are born to be praised; don't
think I'm saying this because you belong to a good family; I'm
sufficiently enlightened not to make that fact responsible for good or
evil; in this case it is a particularly negligible quantity, for on the
stage a man stands or falls by his own merit. I hope you'll have an
early success so that you won't be enlightened too soon; I believe you
deserve it."

"But have you no respect for your art, the greatest and most sublime of
all arts?"

"It's overrated like everything about which men write books. It's full
of danger and can do much harm! A beautifully told lie can impress like
a truth! It's like a mass meeting where the uncultured majority turns
the scale. The more superficial the better--the worse, the better! I
don't mean to say that it is superfluous."

"That can't be your opinion!"

"That _is_ my opinion, but all the same, I may be mistaken."

"But have you really no respect for your art?"

"For mine? Why should I have more respect for my art than for anybody
else's?"

"And yet you've played the greatest parts! You've played Shakespeare!
You've played Hamlet! Have you never been touched in your inmost soul
when speaking that tremendous monologue: To be or not to be...."

"What do you mean by tremendous?"

"Full of profound thought."

"Do explain yourself! Is it so full of profound thought to say: Shall I
take my life or not? I should do so if I knew what comes hereafter, and
everybody else would do the same thing; but as we don't know, we don't
take our lives. Is that so very profound?"

"Not if expressed in those words."

"There you are! You've surely contemplated suicide at one time or
another? Haven't you?"

"Yes; I suppose most people have."

"And why didn't you do it? Because, like Hamlet, you hadn't the
courage, not knowing what comes after. Were you very profound then?"

"Of course I wasn't!"

"Therefore it's nothing but a banality! Or, expressed in one word it
is--what is it, Gustav?"

"Stale!" came a voice from the clock, a voice which seemed to have
waited for its cue.

"It's stale! But, supposing the poet had given us an acceptable
supposition of a future life, that would have been something new."

"Is everything new excellent?" asked Rehnhjelm. Under the pressure of
all the new ideas to which he had been listening, his courage was fast
ebbing away.

"New ideas have one great merit--they are new! Try to think your own
thoughts and you will always find them new! Will you believe me when I
say that I knew what you wanted before you walked in at that door? And
that I know what you are going to say next, seeing that we are
discussing Shakespeare?"

"You are a strange man! I can't help confessing that you're right in
what you're saying, although I don't agree with you."

"What do you say to Anthony's speech over the body of Cæsar? Isn't it
remarkable?"

"That's exactly what I was going to speak about. You seem to be able to
read my thoughts."

"Exactly what I was telling you just now. And is it so wonderful
considering that all men think the same, or at any rate say the same
thing? Well, what do you find in it of any great depth?"

"I can't explain in words...."

"Don't you think it a very commonplace piece of sarcastic oratory? One
expresses exactly the reverse of one's meaning, and if the points are
sharpened, they are bound to sting. But have you ever come across
anything more beautiful than the dialogue between Juliet and Romeo
after their wedding night?"

"Ah! You mean where he says, 'It is the nightingale and not the
lark'...."

"What other passage could I mean? Doesn't every one quote that? It is a
wonderful poetical conception on which the effect depends. Do you think
Shakespeare's greatness depends on poetical conceptions?"

"Why do you break up everything I admire? Why do you take away my
supports?"

"I am throwing away your crutches so that you may learn to walk without
them. But let me ask you to keep to the point."

"You are not asking, you are compelling me to do so."

"Then you should steer clear of me. Your parents are against your
taking this step?"

"Yes! How do you know?"

"Parents always are. Why overrate my judgment? You should never
exaggerate anything."

"Do you think we should be happier if we didn't?"

"Happier? Hm! Do you know anybody who is happy? Give me your own
opinion, not the conventional one."

"No!"

"If you don't believe anybody is happy, how can you postulate such a
condition as being happier? Your parents are alive then? It's a mistake
to have parents."

"Why? What do you mean?"

"Don't you think it unfair of an older generation to bring up a younger
one in its antiquated inanities? Your parents expect gratitude from
you, I suppose?"

"And doesn't one owe it to one's parents?"

"For what? For the fact that with the connivance of the law they have
brought us into this world of misery, have half-starved us, beaten us,
oppressed us, humiliated us, opposed all our wishes? Believe me, a
revolution is needed--two revolutions! Why don't you take some
absinth? Are you afraid of it? Look at the bottle! It's marked with the
Geneva cross! It heals those who have been wounded on the battlefield,
friends and foes alike; it lulls all pain, blunts the keen edge of
thought, blots out memories, stifles all the nobler emotions which
beguile humanity into folly, and finally extinguishes the light of
reason. Do you know what the light of reason is? First, it is a phrase,
secondly, it is a will-o'-the-wisp; one of those flames, you know,
which play about spots where decaying fish have engendered
phosphoretted hydrogen; the light of reason is phosphoretted hydrogen
engendered by the grey brain substance. It is a strange thing.
Everything good on this earth perishes and is forgotten. During my ten
years' touring, and my apparent idleness, I have read through all the
libraries one finds in small towns, and I find that all the twaddle and
nonsense contained in the books is popular and constantly quoted; but
the wisdom is neglected and pushed aside. Do remind me to keep to the
point...."

The clock went through its diabolical tricks and thundered seven. The
door was flung open and a man lurched noisily into the room. He was a
man of about fifty, with a huge, heavy head, fixed between a pair of
lumpy shoulders like a mortar on a gun carriage, with a permanent
elevation of forty-five degrees, looking as if it were going to throw
bombs at the stars. To judge from the face, the owner was capable of
all possible crimes and impossible vices, but too great a coward to
commit any. He immediately threw a bombshell at the melancholy man, and
harshly ordered a glass of grog made of rum, in grammatical, uncouth
language and in the voice of a corporal.

"This is the man who holds your fate in his hands," whispered the
melancholy man to Rehnhjelm. "This is the tragedian, actor-manager, and
my deadly foe."

Rehnhjelm could not suppress a shudder of disgust as he looked at the
terrible individual who, after having exchanged a look of hatred with
Falander, now closed the passage of arms by repeated expectorations.

The door opened again, and in glided the almost elegant figure of a
middle-aged man with oily hair and a waxed moustache. He familiarly
took his place by the side of the actor-manager, who gave him his
middle finger on which shone a ring with a large cornelian.

"This is the editor of the Conservative paper, the defender of throne
and altar. He has the run of the theatre and tries to seduce all the
girls on whom the actor-manager hasn't cast his eye. He started his
career as a Government official, but had to resign his post, I'm
ashamed to tell you why," explained Falander. "But I am also ashamed to
remain in the same room with these gentlemen, and, moreover, I have
asked a few friends here, to-night, to a little supper in celebration
of my recent benefit. If you care to spend the evening in bad company,
among the most unimportant actors, two notorious ladies and an old
blackguard, you are welcome at eight."

Rehnhjelm hesitated a moment before he accepted the invitation.

The spider on the wall climbed through his net as if to examine it and
disappeared. The fly remained in its place a little longer. The sun
sank behind the cathedral, the meshes of the net were undone as if they
had never existed, and the aspens outside the window shivered. The
great man and stage-director raised his voice and shouted--he had
forgotten how to speak:

"Did you see the attack on me in the _Weekly_?"

"Don't take any notice of such piffle."

"Take no notice of it? What the devil do you mean? Doesn't everybody
read it? Of course the whole town does! I should like to give him a
horse-whipping! The impertinent rascal calls me affected and
exaggerated."

"Bribe him! Don't make a fuss!"

"Bribe him? Haven't I tried it? But these Liberal journalists are
damned queer. If you are on friendly terms with them, they'll give you
a nice enough notice; but they won't be bribed however poor they may
be."

"Oh! You don't go about it in the right way! You shouldn't do it
openly, you could send them presents which they can turn into cash, or
cash, if you like, but anonymously, and never refer to it."

"As I do in your case! No, old chap, the trick doesn't work in their
case. I've tried it! It's hell to reckon with people with opinions."

"Who do you think was the victim in the devil's clutches, to change the
subject?"

"That's nothing to do with me."

"Oh, but I think it has! Gustav! Who was the gentleman with Mr.
Falander?"

"His name's Rehnhjelm! He wants to go on the stage."

"What do you say? He wants to go on the stage? He!" shouted the
actor-manager.

"Yes, that's it!" replied Gustav.

"And, of course, act tragedy parts? And be Falander's protégé? And not
come to me? And take away my parts? And honour us by playing here? And
I know nothing about the whole matter? I? I? I'm sorry for him! It's a
pity! Bad prospects for him. Of course, I shall patronize him! I'll
take him under my wing! The strength of my wings may be felt even when
I don't fly! They have a way of pinching now and then! He was a nice
looking lad! A smart lad! Beautiful as Antinous! What a pity he didn't
come to me first, I should have given him Falander's parts, every one
of them! Oh! Oh! Oh! But it isn't too late yet! Hah! Let the devil
corrupt him first! He's still a little too fresh! He really looked
quite an innocent boy! Poor little chap! I'll only say 'God help him!'"

The sound of the last sentence was drowned in the noise made by the
grog drinkers of the whole town who were now beginning to arrive.




CHAPTER XV

THE THEATRICAL COMPANY "PHOENIX"


On the following day Rehnhjelm awoke late in the morning in his hotel
bed. Memories of the previous night arose like phantoms and crowded
round him.

He saw again the pretty, closely shuttered room, richly decorated with
flowers, in which the orgy had been held. He saw the actress, a lady of
thirty-five who, thanks to a younger rival, had to play the parts of
old women; he saw her entering the room, in a frenzy of rage and
despair at the fresh humiliations heaped upon her, throwing herself
full length on the sofa, drinking glass after glass of wine and, when
the temperature of the room rose, opening her bodice, as a man opens
his waistcoat after a too-plentiful dinner.

He saw again the old comedian who, after a very short career, had been
degraded from playing lead to taking servant's parts; he now
entertained the tradespeople of the town with his songs, and, above
all, with the stories of his short glory.

But, in the very heart of the clouds of smoke and his drunken visions
Rehnhjelm saw the picture of a young girl of sixteen, who had arrived
with tears in her eyes, and told the melancholy Falander that the great
actor-manager had again been persecuting her with insulting proposals,
vowing that in future, unless she would accede to them, she should play
only the very smallest parts.

And he saw Falander, listening to everybody's troubles and complaints,
breathing on them until they vanished; he watched him, reducing
insults, humiliations, kicks, accidents, want, misery, and grief to
nothing; watched him teaching his friends and warning them never to
exaggerate anything, least of all their troubles.

But again and again his thoughts reverted to the little girl of sixteen
with the innocent face, with whom he had made friends, and who had
kissed him when they parted, hungrily, passionately. To be quite
candid, her kiss had taken him by surprise. But what _was_ her name?

He rose, and stretching out his hand for the water-bottle, he seized a
tiny handkerchief, spotted with wine. Ah! Here was her name,
ineffaceable, written in marking ink--Agnes! He kissed the handkerchief
twice on the cleanest spot and put it into his box.

When he had carefully dressed himself, he went out to see the
actor-manager, whom he confidently expected to find at the theatre
between twelve and three.

To be on the safe side, he arrived at the office at twelve o'clock; he
found no one there but a porter, who asked him what he wanted and put
himself at his service.

Rehnhjelm did not think that he would need his help, and asked to see
the actor-manager; he was told that the actor-manager was at the
present moment at the factory, but would no doubt come to the office in
the course of the afternoon.

Rehnhjelm supposed factory to be a slang expression for theatre, but
the porter explained to him that the actor-manager was also a match
manufacturer. His brother-in-law, the cashier, was a post office
employé and never came to the theatre before two o'clock; his son, the
secretary, had a post in the telegraph office, and his presence could
never be safely relied upon. But the porter, who seemed to guess the
object of Rehnhjelm's visit, handed him, on his own responsibility and
in the name of the theatre, a copy of the statutes; the young
gentleman was at liberty to amuse himself with it until one of the
managerial staff arrived.

Rehnhjelm possessed his soul in patience and sat down on the sofa to
study the documents. It was half-past twelve when he had finished
reading them. He talked to the porter until a quarter to one, and then
set himself to fathom the meaning of paragraph 1 of the statutes. "The
theatre is a moral institution," it ran, "therefore the members of the
company should endeavour to live in the fear of God, and to lead a
virtuous and moral life." He turned and twisted the sentence about,
trying to throw light upon it, without succeeding. "If the theatre is a
moral institution," he mused, "the members who--in addition to the
manager, the cashier, the secretary, the machinists, and
scene-shifters--form the institution, need not endeavour to practise
all these beautiful things. If it said: The theatre is an immoral
institution and therefore ... there would be some sense in it; but
that, surely, the management does not intend to convey."

He thought of Hamlet's "words, words," but immediately remembered that
to quote Hamlet was stale, and that one ought to clothe one's thoughts
in one's own words; he chose his own term, and called the regulations
nonsense, but discarded the expression again, because it was not
original; but then the original was not original either.

Paragraph 2 helped him to while away a quarter of an hour in meditation
on the text: "The theatre is not a place for amusement; it does not
merely exist to give pleasure." In one place it said the theatre is not
a place for amusement and in another the theatre does not "merely"
exist to give pleasure, therefore it did exist to give pleasure--to a
certain extent.

He reflected under what circumstances the theatre ministered to one's
pleasure. It was amusing to see children, especially sons, defrauding
their parents, more particularly when the parents were thrifty,
goodhearted, and sensible; it was amusing to see wives deceiving their
husbands; especially when the husband was old and required his wife's
care. Besides this he remembered having laughed very heartily at two
old men who nearly died of starvation because their business was on the
decline, and that to this day all the world laughed at it in a piece
written by a classical author. He also recollected having been much
amused by the misfortune of an elderly man who had become deaf; and
that, together with six hundred other men and women, he had shouted
with laughter at a priest, who tried, by natural means, to cure his
insanity, the result of self-restraint; his mirth had been particularly
stimulated by the hypocrisy displayed by the wily priest in order to
gain the object of his desire.

Why does one laugh? he wondered. And as he had nothing else to do, he
tried to find an answer. One laughed at misfortune, want, misery, vice,
virtue, the defeat of good, the victory of evil.

This conclusion, which was partly new to him, put him into a good
temper; he found a great deal of amusement in playing with his
thoughts. As the management still remained invisible, he went on
playing, and, before the lapse of five minutes, he had come to the
following conclusion: In a tragedy one weeps at just those things which
in comedy make one laugh.

At this point his thoughts were arrested; the great actor-manager burst
into the room, brushed past Rehnhjelm without apparently being aware of
his presence and entered a room on the left, whither, a moment
afterwards, the violent ringing of a bell summoned the porter. In less
than half a minute he had gone in and come out again, announcing that
his Highness was ready to receive the visitor.

As Rehnhjelm entered the director had already fired his shot and his
mortar was fixed at an angle which quite prevented him from perceiving
the nervous mortal who was timidly coming into the room. But he had no
doubt heard him, for he asked him immediately, in an offensive manner,
what he wanted.

Rehnhjelm stammered that he was anxious to make his début on the stage.

"What? A début? Have you a repertory, sir? Have you played 'Hamlet,'
'Lear,' 'Richard Sheridan'; been called ten times before the curtain
after the third act? What?"

"I've never played a part."

"Oh, I see! That's quite another thing!"

He sat down in an easy-chair painted with silver paint and covered with
blue brocade. His face had become a mask. He might have been sitting
for a portrait for one of the biographies of Suetonius.

"Shall I give you my candid opinion, what? Leave the theatrical
profession alone!"

"Impossible!"

"I repeat, leave it alone! It's the worst of all professions! Full of
humiliations, unpleasantnesses, little annoyances, and thorns which
will embitter your life so that you'll wish you had never been born."

He looked as if he were speaking the truth, but Rehnhjelm's resolution
was not to be shaken.

"I beg you to take my advice! I solemnly adjure you to drop this idea.
I tell you that the prospects are so bad, that for years to come you'll
have simply to walk on. Think of it! And don't come to me with
complaints when it is too late. The theatrical career is so infernally
difficult, sir, that you would not dream of taking it up, if you had
the least knowledge of it! It's a hell! believe me. I have spoken."

It was a waste of breath.

"Well, wouldn't you prefer an engagement without a début? The risk is
less great."

"I shall be only too pleased; I never expected more."

"Then you'd better sign this agreement. A salary of twelve hundred
crowns and a two years' engagement. Do you agree?"

He pulled a filled-up agreement, signed by the management, from
underneath the blotting-pad, and gave it to Rehnhjelm. The latter's
brain was whirling at the thought of the twelve hundred crowns and he
signed it without a look at the contents.

When he had signed the actor-manager held out his large middle finger
with the cornelian ring, and said: "Be welcome!" He flashed at him with
the gums of his upper jaw and the yellow and bloodshot whites of his
eyes with their green irises.

The audience was over. But Rehnhjelm--in whose opinion the whole
business had been hurried through far too quickly--instead of moving,
took the liberty of asking whether he had not better wait until all the
members of the management were assembled.

"The management?" shouted the great tragedian. "I am the management. If
you have any questions to ask, address yourself to me! If you want
advice, come to me! To me, sir! To nobody else! That's all! You can go
now!"

The skirt of Rehnhjelm's coat must have caught on a nail, for he turned
on the threshold to see what the last words looked like; but he saw
only the red gums, which had the appearance of an instrument of
torture, and the bloodshot eyes; he felt no desire to ask for an
explanation, but went straight to the vaults of the town hall to have
some dinner and meet Falander.

Falander was sitting at one of the tables, calm and indifferent, as if
he were prepared for the worst. He was not surprised to hear that
Rehnhjelm had been engaged, although this news considerably increased
his gloom.

"And what did you think of the manager?" he asked.

"I wanted to box his ears, but I hadn't the courage."

"Nor has the management, and therefore he rules
autocratically--brutality always rules! Perhaps you know that he is a
playwright as well as all the rest?"

"I've heard about it."

"He writes a sort of historical play which is always successful. The
reason is that he writes parts instead of creating characters; he
manipulates the applause at the exits and trades on so-called
patriotism. His characters never talk, they quarrel; men and women, old
and young, all of them; for this reason his popular piece, _The Sons of
King Gustavus_, is rightly called a historical quarrel in five acts; it
contains no action, nothing but quarrels: family rows, street brawls,
scenes in Parliament, and so on. Questions are answered by sly cuts,
which do not provoke scenes, but the most terrible scuffles. There is
no dialogue, nothing but squabbling, in which the characters insult
each other, and the highest dramatic effect is attained by blows. The
critics call his characterisation great. What has he made of Gustavus
Vasa in the play I just mentioned? A broad-shouldered, long-bearded,
bragging, untenable fellow of enormous strength; at the meeting of
Parliament at Västeros, he breaks a table with his fist, and at
Vadstena he kicks a door panel to pieces. On one occasion however the
critics said there was no meaning in his plays; it made him angry, and
he resolved to write comedies with plenty of meaning. He had a boy at
school--the blackguard's married--who had been playing pranks and got a
thrashing. Immediately his father wrote a comedy in which he drew the
masters and exposed the inhuman treatment boys receive at school in
these days. On another occasion he was criticized by an honest
reviewer, and immediately he wrote a comedy, libelling the liberal
journalists of the town. But I'll say no more about him!"

"Why does he hate you?"

"Because I said, at a rehearsal, Don Pasquale, in spite of his
maintaining that the proper pronunciation was Pascal. Result: I was
ordered, on penalty of a fine, to pronounce the word in _his_ way. It
was immaterial to him, he said, how the rest of the world pronounced
the word, at X-köping it was to be pronounced Pascal, because it was
his wish."

"Where does he come from? What was he before?"

"Can't you guess that he was a wheelwright? He'd poison you if he
thought you knew it. But let us change the subject; how do you feel
after last night's revels?"

"Splendid! I quite forgot to thank you!"

"Don't mention it! Are you fond of the girl? I mean Agnes?"

"Yes, I'm very fond of her."

"And she loves you? That's all right, then! Take her!"

"What nonsense you talk! We couldn't be married for a long time!"

"Who told you to be married?"

"What are you driving at?"

"You're eighteen, she's sixteen! You're in love with each other! If
you're agreed, only the most private detail is wanting."

"I don't understand what you mean! Are you trying to encourage me to
behave like a scoundrel towards her?"

"I am trying to encourage you to obey the great voice of nature and
snap your fingers at the petty commands of men. It's only envy if men
condemn your conduct; their much-talked-of morality is nothing but
malice, in a suitable, presentable guise. Hasn't nature called you for
some time to her great banquet, the delight of the gods and the horror
of society afraid of having to pay alimony?"

"Why don't you advise me to marry her?"

"Because that's quite another thing! One doesn't bind oneself for life
after having spent one evening together; it doesn't follow that he who
has enjoyed the rapture, must also undergo the pain. Matrimony is an
affair of souls; there can be no question of this in your case.
However, there's no need for me to spur you on; the inevitable is bound
to happen. Love each other while you're young, before it's too late;
love each other as birds love, without worrying about how to furnish a
home; love as the flowers of the species Dioecia."

"You've no right to talk disrespectfully of the girl. She is good,
innocent, and to be pitied, and whoever denies it is a liar. Have you
ever seen more innocent eyes than hers? Doesn't truth proclaim itself
in the sound of her voice? She is worthy of a great and pure love, not
merely of the passion you speak of. Don't ever talk to me about her in
this way again. You can tell her that I shall look upon it as the
greatest happiness, the highest honour, to ask her to marry me when I'm
worthy of her."

Falander shook his head so violently that the snakes on his forehead
wriggled.

"Worthy of her? Marriage? What stuff!"

"I mean it!"

"Dreadful! And if I should tell you that the girl does not only lack
all the qualities which you ascribe to her, but possesses all the
reverse ones, you wouldn't believe me, but would deprive me of your
friendship?"

"Yes!"

"The world is so full of lies, that nobody will believe a man when he
speaks the truth."

"How can a man believe you, who have no morals?"

"That word again! What an extraordinary word it is! It answers all
questions, cuts off all discussions, excuses all failings--one's own,
not those of others--strikes down all adversaries, pleads for or
against a cause, just like a lawyer. For the moment you have defeated
me with it, next time I shall defeat you. I must be off, I have a
lesson at three! Good-bye, good luck!"

And he left Rehnhjelm to his dinner and his reflections.

      *       *       *       *       *

When Falander arrived home, he put on a dressing-gown and slippers, as
if he were expecting no visitors. But he seemed full of an
uncontrollable restlessness. He walked up and down the room, stopping
every now and then at the window and gazing at the street from behind
the curtain. After a while he stopped before the looking-glass, took
his collar off and laid it on the sofa table. For a few more minutes he
continued his promenade, but suddenly, coming to a standstill before a
card-tray, he took up the photograph of a lady, placed it under a
strong magnifying glass and examined it as if it were a microscopic
slide. He lingered a long time over his examination.

Presently he heard the sound of footsteps on the stairs; quickly
concealing the photograph in the place from where he had taken it, he
jumped up and went and sat at his writing-table, turning his back to
the door. He was apparently absorbed in writing when a knocking--two
short, gentle raps--broke the silence.

"Come in," he called, in a voice which was anything but inviting.

A young girl, small but well-proportioned, entered the room. She had a
delicate, oval face, surrounded by an aureole of hair which might have
been bleached by the sun, for it was of a less pronounced tint than the
usual natural blond. The constant play of the small nose and
exquisitely cut mouth produced roguish curves which were incessantly
changing, like the figures in a kaleidoscope; when, for instance, she
moved the wings of her nose, so that the bright red cartilage showed
like the leaf of the liverwort, her lips fell apart and disclosed the
edges of very small, straight teeth which, although her own, were too
white and even to inspire confidence. Her eyes were drawn up at the
root of the nose and slanted towards the temples; this gave them a
pleading, pathetic expression, which stood in bewitching contrast to
the lower, roguish parts of her face; she had restless pupils, small
like the point of a needle at one moment, and distended at the next,
like the objective of a night-telescope.

On entering the room, she removed the key from the lock and shot the
bolt.

Falander remained sitting at his table, writing.

"You are late to-day, Agnes," he said.

"Yes, I know," she replied, defiantly, taking off her hat.

"We were up late last night."

"Why don't you get up and say how do you do to me? You can't be as
tired as all that!"

"I beg your pardon, I forgot all about it!"

"You forgot? I have noticed for some time that you've been forgetting
yourself in many ways."

"Indeed? Since when have you noticed it?"

"Since when? What do you mean? Please change your dressing-gown and
slippers."

"This is the first time you have found me in them, and you said for
some time. Isn't that funny? Don't you think it is?"

"You are laughing at me! What's the matter with you? You've been
strange for some time."

"For some time? There you are at it again! Why do you say for some
time? Is it because lies have got to be told? Why should it be
necessary to tell lies?"

"Are you accusing me of telling lies?"

"Oh! no, I'm only teasing you!"

"Do you think I can't see that you are tired of me? Do you think I
didn't see last night how attentive you were to that stupid Jenny? You
hadn't a word for me!"

"Do you mean to say you're jealous?"

"Jealous! No, my dear, not in the least! If you prefer her to me, well
and good! I don't care a toss!"

"Really? You're not jealous? Under ordinary circumstances this would be
an unpleasant fact."

"Under ordinary circumstances? What do you mean by that?"

"I mean--quite plainly--that I'm tired of you, as you just suggested."

"It's a lie! You're not!"

The wings of her nose trembled, she showed her teeth and stabbed him
with the needles.

"Let's talk of something else," he said. "What do you think of
Rehnhjelm?"

"I like him very much! He's a dear boy!"

"He's fallen in love with you!"

"Nonsense!"

"And the worst of it is he wants to marry you!"

"Please spare me these inanities!"

"But as he's not twenty, he's going to wait until he's worthy of you,
so he said."

"The little idiot!"

"By worthy he means when he's made a name as an actor. And he can't
succeed in that until he's allowed to play parts. Can't you manage it
for him?"

Agnes blushed, threw herself back on the sofa cushions and exhibited a
pair of elegant little boots with gold tassels.

"I? I can't manage it for myself! You're making fun of me!"

"Yes, I am!"

"You're a friend, Gustav, you really are!"

"Perhaps I am, perhaps I'm not. It's difficult to say. But as a
sensible girl...."

"Oh! shut up!"

She took up a keen-edged paper knife and threatened him in fun, but it
looked very much as if she were in earnest.

"You are very beautiful to-day, Agnes," said Falander.

"To-day? Why to-day? Has it never struck you before?"

"Of course it has!"

"Why are you sighing?"

"Too much drink last night!"

"Let me look at you! What's the matter with your eyes?"

"No sleep last night, my dear!"

"I'll go, then you can take a nap."

"Don't go! I can't sleep anyhow!"

"I must be off! I really only came to tell you that."

Her voice softened; her eyelids dropped slowly, like the curtain after
a death scene.

"It was kind of you to come and tell me that it's all over," said
Falander.

She rose and pinned on her hat before the glass.

"Have you any scent?" she asked.

"Not here; at the theatre."

"You should stop smoking a pipe; the smell hangs about one's clothes."

"I will."

She stooped and fastened her garter.

"I beg your pardon," she said, looking at Falander, pleadingly.

"What for?" he asked, absent-mindedly.

As she made no reply, he took courage and drew a deep breath.

"Where are you going?" he said.

"To be fitted for a dress; you needn't be afraid," she replied,
innocently, as she thought.

Falander could easily tell that it was an excuse.

"Good-bye, then," he said.

She went to him to be kissed. He took her in his arms and pressed her
against him as if he wanted to crush her; then he kissed her on the
forehead, led her to the door, pushed her outside, and said briefly:
"Good-bye!"




CHAPTER XVI

IN THE WHITE MOUNTAINS


One afternoon in August, Falk was again sitting in the garden on Moses
Height; but he was alone, and he had been alone during the whole
summer. He was turning over in his mind all that had happened to him
during the three months which had passed since his last visit, when his
heart was brimful of hope, courage, and strength. He felt old, tired,
indifferent; he had seen the houses at his feet from the inside, and on
every occasion his expectations had been disappointed. He had seen
humanity under many aspects, aspects which are only revealed to the eye
of the poor man's doctor or the journalist, with the only difference
that the journalist generally sees men as they wish to appear, and the
doctor as they are. He had every opportunity of studying man as a
social animal in all possible guises; he had been present at
Parliamentary meetings, church councils, general meetings of
shareholders, philanthropic meetings, police court proceedings,
festivals, funerals, public meetings of working men; everywhere he had
heard big words and many words, words never used in daily intercourse,
a particular species of words which mean nothing, at least not what
they ought to mean. This had given him a one-sided conception of
humanity; he could see in man nothing but the deceitful social animal,
a creature he is bound to be because civilization forbids open war. His
aloofness blinded him to the existence of another animal, an animal
which "between glass and wall" is exceedingly amiable, as long as it
is not exasperated, and which is ready to come out with all its
failings and weaknesses when there are no witnesses. He was blind to it
and that was the reason why he had become embittered.

But the worst of it all was he had lost his self-respect. And that had
happened without his having committed a single action of which he need
have been ashamed. He had been robbed of it by his fellow-creatures,
and it had not been a very difficult thing to do. He had been slighted
everywhere, and how could he, whose self-confidence had been destroyed
in his early youth, respect a person whom everybody despised? With many
a bitter pang he saw that all Conservative journalists, that was to say
men who defended and upheld everything that was wrong--or if they could
not defend it, at least left it untouched--were treated with the utmost
courtesy. He was despised, not so much as a pressman as in his
character of advocate of all those who were down-trodden and hardly
dealt with.

He had lived through times of cruel doubt. For instance: in reporting
the General Meeting of Shareholders of the Marine Insurance Society
"Triton," he had used the word swindle. In replying to his report, the
_Grey Bonnet_ had published a long article proving so clearly that the
society was a national, patriotic, philanthropic institution that he
had almost felt convinced of having been wrong, and the thought of
having recklessly played with the reputation of his fellow citizens was
a nightmare to him for many days to come.

He was now in a state of mind which alternated between fanaticism and
callousness; his next impulse would decide the direction his
development was to take.

His life had been so dreary during the summer that he welcomed with
malicious pleasure every rainy day, and it was a comparatively pleasant
sensation to watch leaves rustling along the garden paths.

He sat absorbed in grimly humorous meditations on life and its
purposes, when one lean, bony hand was laid on his shoulder, and
another clutched his arm; he felt as if death had come to take him at
his word. He looked up and started: before him stood Ygberg, pale as a
corpse, emaciated and looking at him with those peculiarly washed out
eyes which only starvation produces.

"Good morning, Falk," he whispered, almost inaudibly, and his whole
body seemed to rattle.

"Good morning, Ygberg," replied Falk, suddenly brightening up. "Sit
down and have a cup of coffee! How are you? You look as if you had been
lying under the ice."

"Oh! I've been so ill, so ill!"

"You seem to have had as jolly a summer as I had!"

"Have you had a hard time, too?" asked Ygberg, a faint hope that it had
been the case brightening his yellow face.

"I can only say: Thank God that the cursed summer is over! It might be
winter all the year round for all I care! Not only that one is
suffering all the time, but one also has to watch others enjoying
themselves! I never put a foot out of town; did you?"

"I haven't seen a pine tree since Lundell left Lill-Jans in June! And
why should one want to see pine trees? It isn't absolutely essential;
nor is a pine tree anything extraordinary! But that one can't have the
pleasure, that's where the sting comes in."

"Oh, well! Never mind! It's clouding over in the east, therefore it
will rain to-morrow; and when the sun shines again, it will be autumn.
Your health!"

Ygberg looked at the punch as if it were poison, but he drank it
nevertheless.

"But you wrote that beautiful story of the guardian angel, or the
Marine Insurance Society 'Triton,' for Smith," remarked Falk. "Didn't
it go against your convictions?"

"Convictions? I have no convictions."

"Haven't you?"

"No, only fools have convictions."

"Have you no morals, Ygberg?"

"No! Whenever a fool has an idea--it comes to the same thing whether it
is original or not--he calls it his conviction, clings to it and boasts
of it, not because it is _a_ conviction, but because it is _his_
conviction. So far as the Marine Insurance Society is concerned, I
believe it's a swindle! I'm sure it injures many men, the shareholders
at all events, but it's a splendid thing for others, the directors and
employés, for instance; so it does a fair amount of good, after all."

"Have you lost all sense of honour, old friend?"

"One must sacrifice everything on the altar of duty."

"I admit that."

"The first and foremost duty of man is to live--to live at any price!
Divine as well as human law demands it."

"One must never sacrifice honour."

"Both laws, as I said, demand the sacrifice of everything--they compel
a poor man to sacrifice his so-called honour. It's cruel, but you can't
blame the poor man for it."

"Your theory of life is anything but cheerful."

"How could it be otherwise?"

"That's true!"

"But to talk of something else: I've had a letter from Rehnhjelm. I'll
read it to you, if you like."

"I heard he had gone on the stage."

"Yes, and he doesn't seem to be having a good time of it."

Ygberg took a letter from his breast-pocket, put a piece of sugar into
his mouth and began to read.

"If there is a hell in a life after this, which is very doubtful...."

"The lad's become a free-thinker!"

"It cannot be a worse place than this. I've been engaged for two
months, but it seems to me like two years. A devil, formerly a
wheelwright, now theatrical manager, holds my fate in his hand, and
treats me in such a way that three times a day I feel tempted to run
away. But he has so carefully drafted the penal clauses in the
agreement, that my flight would dishonour my parents' name.

"I have _walked on_ every single night, but I've never been allowed to
open my lips yet. For twenty consecutive evenings I have had to smear
my face with umber and wear a gipsy's costume, not a single piece of
which fits me; the tights are too long, the shoes too large, the jacket
is too short. An under-devil, called the prompter, takes good care that
I don't exchange my costume for one more suitable; and whenever I try
to hide myself behind the crowd, which is made up of the
director-manufacturer's factory hands, it opens and pushes me forward
to the footlights. If I look into the wings, my eyes fall on the
under-devil, standing there, grinning, and if I look at the house, I
see Satan himself sitting in a box, laughing.

"I seem to have been engaged for his amusement, not for the purpose of
playing any parts. On one occasion I ventured to draw his attention to
the fact that I ought to have practice in speaking parts if I was ever
going to be an actor. He lost his temper and said that one must learn
to crawl before one can learn to walk. I replied that I could walk. He
said it was a lie and asked me whether I imagined that the art of
acting, the most beautiful and difficult of all arts, required no
training. When I said that that was exactly what I did imagine, and
that I was impatiently waiting for the beginning of my training, he
told me I was an ignorant puppy, and he would kick me out. When I
remonstrated, he asked me whether I looked upon the stage as a refuge
for impecunious youths. My reply was a frank, unconditional glad Yes.
He roared that he would kill me.

"This is the present state of my affairs.

"I feel that my soul is flickering out like a tallow candle in a
draught, and I shall soon believe that 'Evil will be victorious, even
though it be concealed in clouds,' as the Catechism has it.

"But the worst of all is that I have lost all respect for this art,
which was the dream and the love of my boyhood. Can I help it when I
see that men and women without education or culture, spurred on by
vanity and recklessness, completely lacking in enthusiasm and
intelligence are able to play in a few months' time character parts,
historical parts, fairly well, without having a glimmer of knowledge of
the time in which they move, or the important part which the person
they represent played in history?

"It is slow murder, and the association with this mob which keeps me
down--some of the members of the company have come into collision with
various paragraphs of the penal code--is making of me what I've never
been, an aristocrat. The pressure of the cultured can never weigh as
heavily on the uncultured.

"There is but one ray of light in this darkness: I am in love. She is
purest gold among all this dross. Of course she, too, is persecuted and
slowly murdered, just as I am, since she refused the stage-manager's
infamous proposals. She is the only woman with a living spirit among
all these beasts, wallowing in filth, and she loves me with all her
soul. We are secretly engaged. I am only waiting for the day when I
shall have won success, to make her my wife. But when will that be? We
have often thought of dying together, but hope, treacherous hope, has
always beguiled us into continuing this misery. To see my innocent love
burning with shame when she is forced to wear improper costumes, is
more than I can bear. But I will drop this unpleasant subject.

"Olle and Lundell wish to be remembered. Olle is very much changed. He
has drifted into a new kind of philosophy, which tears down everything
and turns all things upside down. It sounds very jolly and sometimes
seems true, but it must be a dangerous doctrine if carried out.

"I believe he owes these ideas to one of the actors here, an
intelligent and well-informed man, who lives a very immoral life; I
like and hate him at the same time. He is a queer chap, fundamentally
good, noble and generous; a man who will sacrifice himself for his
friends. I cannot fix on any special vice, but he is immoral, and a man
without morality is a blackguard--don't you think so?

"I must stop, my angel, my good spirit is coming. There is a happy hour
in store for me; all evil spirits will flee, and I shall be a better
man.

"Remember me to Falk and tell him to think of me when life is hard on
him."

                                                    "Your friend R."

"Well, what do you think of that?"

"It's the old story of the struggle of the wild beasts. I'll tell you
what, Ygberg, I believe one has to be very unscrupulous if one wants to
get on in the world."

"Try it! You may not find it so easy!"

"Are you still doing business with Smith?"

"No, unfortunately not! And you?"

"I've seen him on the subject of my poems. He has bought them, ten
crowns the folio, and he can now murder me in the same way as the
wheelwright is murdering Rehnhjelm. And I'm afraid something of the
sort is going to happen, for I haven't heard a word about them. He was
so exceedingly friendly that I expect the worst. If only I knew what's
going on! But what's the matter with you? You're as white as a sheet."

"The truth is," replied Ygberg, clutching the railings, "all I've had
to eat these last two days has been five lumps of sugar. I'm afraid I'm
going to faint."

"If food will set you right, I can help you; fortunately I have some
money."

"Of course it will set me right," whispered Ygberg faintly.

But it was not so. When they were sitting in the dining-room and food
was served to them, Ygberg grew worse, and Falk had to take him to his
room, which fortunately was not very far off.

      *       *       *       *       *

The house was an old, one-story house built of wood; it had climbed on
to a rock and looked as if it suffered from hip-disease. It was spotted
like a leper; a long time ago it was going to be painted, but when the
old paint had been burned off, nothing more was done to it; it looked
in every respect miserable, and it was hard to believe the legend of
the sign of the Fire Insurance Office, rusting on the wall, namely,
that a phoenix should rise from the ashes.

At the base of the house grew dandelions, nettles, and roadweed, the
faithful companions of poverty; sparrows were bathing in the scorching
sand and scattering it about; pale-faced children with big stomachs,
looking as if they were being brought up on 90 per cent. of water, were
making dandelion chains and trying to embitter their sad lives by
annoying and insulting each other.

Falk and Ygberg climbed a rotten, creaking staircase and came to a
large room. It was divided into three parts by chalk lines. The first
and second divisions served a joiner and a cobbler as workshops; the
third was exclusively devoted to the more intimate pursuits of family
life.

Whenever the children screamed, which happened once in every quarter of
an hour, the joiner flew into a rage and burst out scolding and
swearing; the cobbler remonstrated with quotations from the Bible. The
joiner's nerves were so shattered by these constant screams, the
unceasing punishments and scoldings, that five minutes after partaking
of the snuff of reconciliation offered by the cobbler, he flew into a
fresh temper in spite of his firm resolve to be patient. Consequently
he was nearly all day long in a red-hot fury. But the worst passages
were when he asked the woman, "why these infernal females need bring so
many children into the world;" then the woman in question came on the
tapis and his antagonist gave him as good as he brought.

Falk and Ygberg had to pass this room to gain the latter's garret, and
although both of them went on tiptoe, they wakened two of the children;
immediately the mother began humming a lullaby, thereby interrupting a
discussion between cobbler and joiner; naturally the latter nearly had
a fit.

"Hold your tongue, woman!"

"Hold your tongue yourself! Can't you let the children sleep?"

"To hell with the children! Are they my children? Am I to suffer for
other people's immorality? Am I an immoral man? What? Have I any
children? Hold your tongue, I say, or I'll throw my plane at your
head."

"I say, master, master!" began the cobbler; "you shouldn't talk like
that of the children; God sends the little ones into the world."

"That's a lie, cobbler! The devil sends them! The devil! And then the
dissolute parents blame God! You ought to be ashamed of yourselves!"

"Master, master! You shouldn't use such language! Scripture tells us
that the kingdom of heaven belongs to the children."

"Oh, indeed! They have them in the kingdom of heaven, have they?"

"How dare you talk like that!" shrilled the furious mother. "If you
ever have any children of your own, I shall pray that they may be lame
and diseased; I shall pray that they shall be blind and deaf and dumb;
I shall pray that they shall be sent to the reformatory and end on the
gallows; see if I won't."

"Do so for all I care, you good-for-nothing hussy! I'm not going to
bring children into the world to see them living a dog's life. You
ought to be sent to the House of Correction, for bringing the poor
things into all this misery. You are married, you say? Well! Need you
be immoral because you are married?"

"Master, master! God sends the children."

"It's a lie, cobbler! I read in a paper the other day that the damned
potato is to blame for the large families of the poor; don't you see,
the potato consists of two substances, called oxygen and nitrogen;
whenever these substances occur in a certain quantity and proportion,
women become prolific."

"But what is one to do?" asked the angry mother, whom this interesting
explanation had calmed down a little.

"One shouldn't eat potatoes; can't you see that?"

"But what is one to eat if not potatoes?"

"Beef-steak, woman! Steak and onions! What! Isn't that good? Or steak à
la Châteaubriand! Do you know what that is? What? I saw in the
'Fatherland' the other day that a woman who had taken womb-grain very
nearly died as well as the baby."

"What's that?" asked the mother, pricking up her ears.

"You'd like to know, would you?"

"Is it true what you just said about womb-grain?" asked the cobbler,
blinking his eyes.

"Hoho! That brings up your lungs and liver, but there's a heavy penalty
on it, and that's as it should be."

"Is it as it should be?" asked the cobbler dully.

"Of course it is! Immorality must be punished; and it's immoral to
murder one's children."

"Children! Surely, there's a difference," replied the angry mother,
resignedly; "but where does the stuff you just spoke about come from,
master?"

"Haha! You want more children, you hussy, although you are a widow with
five! Beware of that devil of a cobbler! He's hard on women, in spite
of his piety. A pinch of snuff, cobbler?"

"There is really a herb then...."

"Who said it was a herb? Did I say so? No; it's an organic substance.
Let me tell you, all substances--nature contains about sixty--are
divided into organic and inorganic substances. This one's Latin name is
cornuticus secalias; it comes from abroad, for instance from the
Calabrian Peninsula."

"Is it very expensive, master?" asked the cobbler.

"Expensive!" ejaculated the joiner, manipulating his plane as if it
were a carbine. "It's awfully expensive!"

Falk had listened to the conversation with great interest. Now he
started; he had heard a carriage stopping underneath the window, and
the sound of two women's voices which seemed familiar to him.

"This house looks all right."

"Does it?" said an older voice. "I think it looks dreadful."

"I meant it looks all right for our purpose. Do you know, driver,
whether any poor people are living in this house?"

"I don't know," replied the driver, "but I'd stake my oath on it."

"Swearing is a sin, so you had better not. Wait for us here, while we
go upstairs to do our duty."

"I say, Eugenia, hadn't we better first talk a little to the children
down here?" said Mrs. Homan to Mrs. Falk, lagging behind.

"Perhaps it would be just as well. Come here, little boy! What's your
name?"

"Albert," answered a pale-faced little lad of six.

"Do you know Jesus, my laddie?"

"No," answered the child with a laugh, and put a finger into his mouth.

"Terrible!" said Mrs. Falk, taking out her note-book. "I'd better say:
Parish of St. Catherine's. White Mountains. Profound spiritual darkness
in the minds of the young. I suppose darkness is the right word?" She
turned to the little fellow: "And don't you want to know him?"

"No!"

"Would you like a penny?"

"Yes!"

"You should say please! Indescribably neglected, but I succeeded, by
gentleness, in awakening their better feelings."

"What a horrible smell! Let's go, Eugenia," implored Mrs. Homan.

They went upstairs and entered the large room without knocking.

The joiner seized his plane and began planing a knotty board, so that
the ladies had to shout to make themselves heard.

"Is anybody here thirsting for salvation?" shouted Mrs. Homan, while
Mrs. Falk worked her scent-spray so vigorously that the children began
to cry with the smarting of their eyes.

"Are you offering us salvation, lady?" asked the joiner, interrupting
his work. "Where did you get it from? Perhaps there's charity to be
had, too, and humiliation and pride?"

"You are a ruffian; you will be damned," answered Mrs. Homan.

Mrs. Falk made notes in her note-book. "He's all right," she remarked.

"Is there anything else you'd like to say?" asked Mrs. Homan.

"We know the sort you are! Perhaps you'd like to talk to me about
religion, ladies? I can talk on any subject. Have you ever heard
anything about the councils held at Nicæa, or the Smalcaldic Articles?"

"We know nothing about that, my good man."

"Why do you call me good? Scripture says nobody is good but God alone.
So you know nothing about the Nicene Council, ladies? How can you dare
to teach others, when you know nothing yourselves? And if you want to
dispense charity, do it while I turn my back to you, for true charity
is given secretly. Practise on the children, if you like, they can't
defend themselves; but leave us in peace. Give us work and pay us a
just wage and then you needn't run about like this. A pinch of snuff,
cobbler!"

"Shall I write: Great unbelief, quite hardened, Evelyn?" asked Mrs.
Falk.

"I should put _impenitent_, dear."

"What are you writing down, ladies? Our sins? Surely your book's too
small for that!"

"The outcome of the so-called working men's unions...."

"Very good," said Mrs. Homan.

"Beware of the working men's unions," said the joiner. "For hundreds of
years war has been made upon the kings, but now we've discovered that
the kings are not to blame. The next campaign will be against all
idlers who live on the work of others; then we shall see something."

"That's enough!" said the cobbler.

The angry mother, whose eyes had been riveted on Mrs. Falk during the
whole scene, took the opportunity of putting in a word.

"Excuse me, but aren't you Mrs. Falk?" she asked.

"No," answered that lady with an assurance which took even Mrs. Homan's
breath away.

"But you're as like her as its possible to be! I knew her father,
Ronock, who's now on the flagship."

"That's all very nice, but it doesn't concern us.... Are there any
other people in this house who need salvation?"

"No," said the joiner, "they don't need salvation, they need food and
clothes, or, better still, work; much work and well-paid work. But the
ladies had better not go and see them, for one of them is down with
small-pox...."

"Small-pox!" screamed Mrs. Homan, "and nobody said a word about it!
Come along Eugenia, let's at once inform the police! What a disgusting
set of people they are!"

"But the children? Whose children are these? Answer!" said Mrs. Falk,
holding up her pencil, threateningly.

"They're mine, lady," answered the mother.

"But your husband? Where's your husband?"

"Disappeared!" said the joiner.

"We'll set the police on his track! He shall be sent to the
Penitentiary. Things must be changed here! I said it was a good house,
Evelyn."

"Won't the ladies sit down?" asked the joiner. "It's so much easier to
keep up a conversation sitting down. We've no chairs, but that doesn't
matter; we've no beds either; they went for taxes, for the lighting of
the street, so that you need not go home from the theatre in the dark.
We've no gas, as you can see for yourselves. They went in payment of
the water-rate--so that your servants should be saved running up and
down stairs; the water's not laid on here. They went towards the
keeping up of the hospitals, so that your sons will not be laid up at
home when...."

"Come away, Eugenia, for God's sake! This is unbearable!"

"I agree with you, ladies, it is unbearable," said the joiner. "And the
day will come when things will be worse; on that day we shall come down
from the White Mountains with a great noise, like a waterfall, and ask
for the return of our beds. Ask? We shall take them! And you shall lie
on wooden benches, as I've had to do, and eat potatoes until your
stomachs are as tight as a drum and you feel as if you had undergone
the torture by water, as we...."

But the ladies had fled, leaving behind them a pile of pamphlets.

"Ugh! What a beastly smell of eau-de-Cologne! It smells of
prostitutes!" said the joiner. "A pinch of snuff, cobbler!"

He wiped his forehead with his blue apron and took up his plane while
the others reflected silently.

Ygberg, who had been asleep during the whole of the scene, now awoke
and made ready to go out again with Falk. Once more Mrs. Homan's voice
floated through the open window:

"What did she mean when she said your father was on the flagship? Your
father is a captain, isn't he?"

"That's what he's called. It's the same thing. Weren't they an insolent
crowd? I'll never go there again. But it will make a fine report. To
the restaurant Hasselbacken, driver!"




CHAPTER XVII

NATURA....


Falander was at home studying a part one afternoon, when he was
disturbed by a gentle tapping, two double-raps, at his door. He jumped
up, hastily donned a coat and opened.

"Agnes! This is a rare visit!"

"I had to come and see you, it's so damned slow!"

"What dreadful language!"

"Let me curse! It relieves my feelings."

"Hm! hm!"

"Give me a cigar; I haven't had a smoke these last six weeks. This
education makes me frantic."

"Is he so severe?"

"Curse him!"

"For shame, Agnes!"

"I've been forbidden to smoke, to curse, to drink punch, to go out in
the evening! But wait until we are married! I'll let him see!"

"Is he really serious about it?"

"Absolutely! Look at this handkerchief!"

"A. R. with a crown and nine balls."

"Our initials are the same and he's making me use his design. Isn't it
lovely?"

"Yes, very nice. It's gone as far as that, has it?"

The angel, dressed in blue, threw herself on the sofa and puffed at her
cigar. Falander looked at her body as if he were making an estimate,
and said:

"Will you have a glass of punch?"

"Rather!"

"Are you in love with your fiancé?"

"He doesn't belong to the class of men with whom one can really be in
love. But I don't know. Love? Hm! What is love?"

"Yes, what is it?"

"Oh, you know what I mean. He's very respectable, awfully respectable,
but, but, but...."

"But?"

"He's so proper."

She looked at Falander with a smile which would have saved the absent
fiancé, if he could have seen it.

"He isn't demonstrative enough?" asked Falander curiously, in an
unsteady voice.

She drank her glass of punch, paused, shook her head, and said with a
theatrical sigh:

"No!"

The reply seemed to satisfy Falander; it obviously relieved him. He
continued his cross-examination.

"It may be a long time before you can get married. He's never played a
single part yet."

"No, I know."

"Won't you find the waiting dull?"

"One must be patient."

I must use the thumbscrew, thought Falander.

"I suppose you know that Jenny and I are lovers?"

"The ugly, old hag!"

A whole shower of white northern lights flamed across her face and
every muscle twitched, as if she were under the influence of a galvanic
battery.

"She isn't as old as all that," said Falander coldly. "Have you heard
that the waiter Gustav is going to play Don Diego in the new piece, and
that Rehnhjelm has been given the part of his servant? The waiter is
bound to have a success, for the part plays itself; but poor Rehnhjelm
will die with shame."

"Good heavens! Is it true?"

"It's true enough."

"It shan't happen!"

"Who's to prevent it?"

She jumped up from the sofa, emptied her glass and began to sob
wildly.

"Oh! How bitter the world is, how bitter!" she sobbed. "It's just as if
an evil power were spying on us, finding out our wishes, merely to
cross them; discerning our hopes, so as to shatter them; anticipating
our thoughts so as to paralyse them. If it were possible to long for
evil to happen to oneself, one ought to do it just for the sake of
making a fool of that power."

"Quite true, my dear; therefore one should always be prepared for a bad
ending. But that's not the worst. I'll give you a thought which will
comfort you. You know that every success you attain entails someone
else's failure; if you are given a part to play, some other woman is
disappointed; it makes her writhe like a worm trodden under foot, and
without knowing it you have committed a wrong; therefore, even
happiness is poisoned. Be comforted in misfortune by the thought that
every piece of ill-luck which falls to your share is equivalent to a
good action, even though it be a good action committed without your
knowing it; and the thought of a good action is the only pure enjoyment
which is given to us mortals."

"I don't want to do any good actions! I don't want any pure joys! I
have the same right to success as everybody else! And I--will--be
successful!"

"At any price?"

"I won't play your mistress's maid at any price."

"You're jealous! Learn to bear failure gracefully! That's greater--and
much more interesting."

"Tell me one thing! Is she in love with you?"

"I'm afraid she loves me only too well."

"And you?"

"I? I shall never love any woman but you!"

He seized her hand.

She jumped up from the sofa, showing her stockings.

"Do you believe in what is called love?" she asked, gazing at him with
distended pupils.

"I believe there are several kinds of love."

She crossed the room towards the door.

"Do you love me wholly and entirely?" She put her hand on the
door-handle.

He pondered for two seconds. Then he replied:

"Your soul is evil, and I don't love evil."

"I don't care a fig for my soul! Do you love me? Me?"

"Yes! So deeply...."

"Why did you send me Rehnhjelm?"

"Because I wanted to find out what life without you would be like."

"Did you lie when you said you were tired of me?"

"Yes, I lied."

"Oh! You old devil!"

She took the key out of the lock and he drew down the blind.




CHAPTER XVIII

NIHILISM


As Falk was walking home one rainy September evening and turning into
Count-Magni-Street, he saw to his amazement that his windows were lit
up. When he was near enough to be able to cast a glance into his room
from below, he noticed on the ceiling the shadow of a man which seemed
familiar, although he could not place it. It was a despondent-looking
shadow, and the nearer he came the more despondent it looked.

On entering his room he saw Struve sitting at his writing-table with
his head on his hands. His clothes were soaked with rain and clung
heavily to his body; there were little puddles on the floor which
slowly drained off through the chinks. His hair hung in damp strands
from his head, and his usually English whiskers fell like stalactites
on his damp coat collar. He had placed his black hat beside him on the
table; it had collapsed under its own weight, and the wide crape band
which it was wearing suggested that it was mourning for its lost youth.

"Good evening," said Falk. "This is an unexpected honour."

"Don't jeer at me," begged Struve.

"And why not? I see no reason why I should spare you."

"I see! You're done!"

"Yes! I shall turn Conservative too, before long. You're in mourning, I
see; I hope I may congratulate you."

"I've lost a little son."

"Then I'll congratulate him! But what do you want here? You know I
despise you! I expect you do yourself. Don't you?"

"Of course I do! But isn't life bitter enough without our unnecessarily
embittering it still further? If God, or Providence, is amused at it,
need it follow that man should equally degrade himself?"

"That sounds reasonable and does you honour. Won't you put on my
dressing-gown while you are drying your clothes? You must be cold."

"Thank you! But I mustn't stay."

"Oh! Stay a little while! It will give us a chance of having things
out."

"I don't like talking about my misfortunes."

"Then talk about your crimes!"

"I haven't committed any!"

"Oh, yes, you have! You have committed great crimes! You have put your
heavy hand on the oppressed; you have kicked the wounded; you have
sneered at the wretched. Do you remember the last strike when you were
on the side of power?"

"The side of the law, brother!"

"Haha! The law! Who has dictated the law which governs the life of the
poor man, you fool! The rich man! That is to say, the master made the
law for the slave."

"The law was dictated by the whole nation and the universal sense of
right. God gave the law."

"Save your big words when you talk to me. Who wrote the law of 1734?
Mr. Kronstedt! Who is responsible for the law of corporal punishment?
Colonel Sabelman--it was his Bill, and his friends, who formed the
majority at that time, pushed it through. Colonel Sabelman is not the
nation and his friends are not the universal sense of right. Who is
responsible for the law concerning joint stock companies? Judge
Svindelgren. Who is responsible for the new Parliamentary laws?
Assessor Vallonius. Who has written the law of 'legal protection,' that
is to say the protection of the rich from the just claims of the poor?
Wholesale merchant grocer. Don't talk to me! I know your claptrap. Who
has written the new law of succession? Criminals! The forest laws?
Thieves! The law relating to bills of private banks? Swindlers! And you
maintain that God has done it? Poor God!"

"May I give you a piece of advice, bought with my own experience,
advice which will be useful to you all your life? If you want to escape
self-immolation, a fate which in your fanaticism you are fast
approaching, change your point of view as soon as possible. Take a
bird's-eye view of the world, and you will see how small and
insignificant everything is. Start with the conviction that the whole
world is a rubbish heap; that men are the refuse, no better than
egg-shells, carrot stalks, cabbage leaves, rags; then nothing will take
you by surprise, you will never lose an illusion; but, on the contrary,
you will be filled with a great joy whenever you come across a fine
thought, a good action; try to acquire a calm contempt of the
world--you needn't be afraid of growing callous."

"I have not yet attained to that point of view, it's true, but I have a
contempt for the world. But that is my misfortune; for directly I hear
of a single act of generosity or kindness, I love humanity again, and
overrate my fellowmen, only to be deceived afresh."

"Be more selfish! Let the devil take your fellowmen!"

"I'm afraid I can't."

"Try another profession; join your brother; he seems to get on in this
world. I saw him yesterday at the church council of the Parish of St.
Nicholas."

"At the church council?"

"Yes; that man has a future. The pastor primarius nodded to him. He'll
soon be an alderman, like all landed proprietors."

"What about the 'Triton'?"

"They work with debentures now; but your brother hasn't lost anything
by it, even though he hasn't made anything. No, he's other fish to
fry!"

"Don't let us talk of that man."

"But he's your brother!"

"That isn't his merit! But now tell me what you want."

"My boy's funeral is to-morrow, and I have no dress-coat...."

"I'll lend you mine."

"Thank you, brother. You're extricating me from an awkward position.
That was one thing, but there is something else, of a rather more
delicate nature...."

"Why come to me, your enemy, with your delicate confidences? I'm
surprised...."

"Because you are a man of heart."

"Don't build on that any longer! But go on."

"How irritable you've grown! You're not the same man; you used to be so
gentle."

"We discussed that before! Speak up!"

"I want to ask you whether you would come with me to the churchyard."

"I? Why don't you ask one of your colleagues from the _Grey Bonnet_?"

"There are reasons. I don't see why I shouldn't tell you. I'm not
married."

"Not married! You! The defender of religion and morality, have broken
the sacred bonds!"

"Poverty, the force of circumstances! But I'm just as happy as if I
were married! I love my wife and she loves me, and that's all. But
there's another reason. The child has not been baptized; it was three
weeks old when it died, and therefore no clergyman will bury it. I
don't dare to tell this to my wife, because she would fret. I've told
her the clergyman would meet us in the churchyard; I'm telling you this
to prevent a possible scene. She, of course, will remain at home.
You'll only meet two other fellows; one of them, Levi, is a younger
brother of the director of the 'Triton,' and one of the employés of
that society. He's a decent sort, with an unusually good head and a
still better heart. Don't laugh, I can see that you think I've
borrowed money from him--and so I have--he's a man you'll like. The
other one is my old friend, Dr. Borg, who treated the little one. He is
very broad-minded, a man without any prejudices; you'll get on with
him! I can count on you, can't I? There'll be four of us in the coach,
and the little coffin, of course."

"Very well, I'll come."

"There's one more thing. My wife has religious scruples and is afraid
that the little one won't go to heaven because he died without baptism.
She asks everybody's opinion on the subject, so as to ease her mind."

"But what about the Augsburg Confession?"

"It's not a question of confessions."

"But in writing to your paper, you always uphold the official faith."

"The paper is the affair of the syndicate; if it likes to cling to
Christianity, it may do so for all I care! My work for the syndicate is
a matter apart. Please agree with my wife if she tells you that she
believes that her child will go to heaven."

"I don't mind denying the faith in order to make a human heart happy,
particularly as I don't hold it. But you haven't told me yet where you
live."

"Do you know where the White Mountains are?"

"Yes! Are you living in the spotted house on the mountain rock?"

"Do you know it?"

"I've been there once."

"Then perhaps you know Ygberg, the Socialist, who leads the people
astray? I am the landlord's deputy--Smith owns the property--I live
there rent free on condition that I collect the rents; whenever the
rents are not forthcoming, the people talk nonsense which he has put
into their heads about capital and labour, and other things which fill
the columns of the Socialistic press."

Falk did not reply.

"Do you know Ygberg?"

"Yes, I do. But won't you try on my dress-coat now?"

Struve tried it on, put his own damp coat over it, buttoned it up to
the chin, lit the chewed-up end of his cigar, impaled on a match, and
went.

Falk lighted him downstairs.

"You've a long way to go," he said, merely to say something.

"The Lord knows it! And I have no umbrella."

"And no overcoat. Would you like my winter coat?"

"Many thanks. It's very kind of you."

"You can return it to me by and by."

He went back to his room, fetched the overcoat and gave it to Struve,
who was waiting in the entrance hall. After a brief good-night they
parted.

Falk found the atmosphere in his room stifling; he opened the window.
The rain was coming down in torrents, splashing on the tiles and
running down into the dirty street. Tattoo sounded in the barracks
opposite; vespers were being sung in the lodgment; fragments of the
verses floated through the open window.

Falk felt lonely and tired. He had been longing to fight a battle with
a representative of all he regarded as inimical to progress; but the
enemy, after having to some extent beaten him, had fled. He tried to
understand clearly what the quarrel was about, but failed in his
effort; he was unable to say who was right. He asked himself whether
the cause he served, namely, the cause of the oppressed, had any
existence. But at the next moment he reproached himself with cowardice,
and the steady fanaticism which glowed in him burst into fresh flames;
he condemned the weakness which again and again had induced him to
yield. Just now he had held the enemy in his hand, and not only had he
not shown him his profound repugnance, but he had even treated him with
kindness and sympathy; what would he think of him?

There was no merit in this good nature, as it prevented him from
coming to a firm decision; it was nothing but moral laxity, making him
incapable of taking up a fight which seemed more and more beyond him.
He realized that he must extinguish the fire under the boilers; they
would not be able to stand the pressure, as no steam was being used. He
pondered over Struve's advice, and brooded until his mind was chaos in
which truth and lies, right and wrong, danced together in complete
harmony; his brain in which, owing to his academic training, all
conceptions had been so neatly pigeon-holed, would soon resemble a pack
of well-shuffled cards.

He succeeded beyond expectation in working himself into a state of
complete indifference; he looked for fine motives in the actions of his
enemies, and gradually it appeared to him that he had all along been in
the wrong; he felt reconciled to the existing order of things, and
ultimately came to the fine conclusion that it was quite immaterial
whether the whole was black or white. Whatever was, had to be; he was
not entitled to criticize it. He found this mood pleasant, it gave him
a feeling of restfulness to which he had been a stranger all those
years during which he had made the troubles of humanity his own.

He was enjoying this calm and a pipe of strong tobacco, when a maid
servant brought him a letter just delivered by the postman. It was from
Olle Montanus and very long. Parts of it seemed to impress Falk
greatly.

MY DEAR FELLOW, [it ran,]

Although Lundell and I have now finished our work and will soon be back
in Stockholm, I yet feel the need of writing down my impressions,
because they have been of great importance to myself and my spiritual
development. I have come to a conclusion, and I am as full of amazement
as a chicken which has just been hatched, and stares at the world with
its newly opened eyes, trampling on the egg-shell which had shut out
the light for so long. The conclusion, of course, is not a new one;
Plato propounded it before Christianity was: the world, the visible
world, is but a delusion, the reflexion of the ideas; that is to say,
reality is something low, insignificant, secondary and accidental. Yes!
but I will proceed synthetically, begin with the particular and pass on
from it to the general.

I will speak of my work first, in which both Government and Parliament
have been interested. On the altar of the church at Träskola two wooden
figures used to stand; one of them was broken, but the other one was
whole. The whole one, the figure of a woman, held a cross in her hand;
two sacks of fragments of the broken one were preserved in the
sacristy. A learned archæologist had examined the contents of the two
sacks, in order to determine the appearance of the broken figure, but
the result had been mere conjecture.

But he had been very thorough. He had taken a specimen of the white
paint with which the figure had been grounded, and sent it to the
Pharmaceutical Institute; the latter had reported that it contained
lead and not zinc; therefore, the figure must date from before 1844,
because zinc-white did not come into use until after that date. (What
can one say to such a conclusion, seeing that the figure might have
been painted over!) Next he sent a sample of the wood to the Stockholm
timber office; he was informed that it was birch. The figure was
therefore made of birchwood and dated from before 1844.

But that was not all he was striving for. He had a reason (!) in plain
words, he wished for his own aggrandisement, that the carved figures
should be proved to date from the sixteenth century; and he would have
preferred that they should be the work of the great--of course _great_,
because his name had been so deeply carved in oak that it has been
preserved to our time--Burchard von Schiedenhanne, who had carved the
seats in the choir of the Cathedral of Västeros.

The learned research was carried on. The professor stole a little
plaster from the figures in Västeros and sent it, together with a
specimen from the sacristy of Träskola to the Ekole Pollytechnik (I
can't spell it). The reply completely crushed the scoffers; the
analysis proved that the two specimens of plaster were identical; both
contained 77 per cent. of chalk and 35 of sulphuric acid; therefore (!)
the figures must date from the same period.

The age of the figures had now been settled; a sketch was made of the
whole one and "sent in" (what a terrible passion these learned men have
for "sending things in") to the Academy; the only thing which remained
to be done was to determine and reconstruct the broken one. For two
whole years the two sacks travelled up and down between Upsala and
Lund; the two professors differed and carried on a lively dispute. The
professor of Lund, who had just been made rector, took the figure as
the subject of his inaugural address and crushed the professor of
Upsala. The latter replied in a brochure. Fortunately at the very
moment a professor of the Stockholm Academy of Art appeared with a
totally new opinion; then Herod and Pilate "compromised," as is always
the case, and attacked the man from the capital, rending him with the
unbridled fury of provincials.

This was their compromise: the broken figure had represented Unbelief,
because the other one must have been meant for Faith, whose symbol is
the cross. The supposition (advanced by the professor of Lund) that the
broken figure had been intended to represent Hope, arrived at because
one of the sacks contained an anchor, was rejected, because that would
have postulated a third figure, Love, of which there was no trace, and
for which there could have been no room; moreover, it was proved by
specimens from the rich collection of arrow-heads in the historical
museum, that the fragment in question was not an anchor, but an
arrowhead, which forms a part of the weapons belonging to the symbols
of Unbelief. The shape of the arrowhead, which resembled in every
detail those from the period of the Vice-regent Sture, removed the last
doubt as to the age of the figure.

It was my task to make a statue of Unbelief, as a companion to the
figure of Faith, in accordance with the directions of the professors. I
was given my instructions and I did not hesitate. I looked for a male
model, for the figure was to be a man; I had to look for a long time,
but I found him in the end; I really believe I met the personification
of Unbelief--and I succeeded brilliantly.

And there he now stands, Falander, the actor, to the left of the altar,
with a Mexican bow (used in the drama _Ferdinand Cortez_) and a robber's
cloak (from _Fra Diavolo_), but the people say that it is Unbelief
throwing down his arms before Faith. And the Deputy-Superintendent, who
preached the inaugural sermon, spoke of the splendid gifts which God
sometimes gives to man, and which, in this case, he had given to me; and
the Count, who gave the inaugural dinner, declared that I had created a
masterpiece, fit to stand side by side with the antiques (he's been in
Italy); and a student who occupies some post in the Count's household,
seized the opportunity to write and circulate some verses, in which he
developed the conception of the Sublimely Beautiful, and gave a history
of the Myth of the Devil.

Up to now I have, like a true egoist, spoken only of myself. What am I
to say about Lundell's altar-piece? I will try to describe it to you.
Christ (Rehnhjelm) hangs on the cross in the background; to the left is
the impenitent thief (I; and the rascal has made me worse-looking than
I am); to the right the repenting thief (Lundell himself, squinting
with hypocritical eyes at Rehnhjelm); at the foot of the cross Mary
Magdalene (you will remember Marie--in a very low dress), and a Roman
centurion (Falander) on horseback (stallion belonging to Alderman
Olsson).

I cannot describe the awful impression made on me when, after the
sermon, the picture was unveiled, and I saw all these well-known faces
staring from the wall above the altar at the community rapturously
listening to the words of the preacher on the great importance of art,
particularly art in the service of religion. As far as I am concerned,
a veil has been lifted from many things; I will tell you by and by my
thoughts on Faith and Unbelief. I am going to embody my views on art
and its high mission in an essay, and read it at some public hall as
soon as I am back in town.

It goes without saying that Lundell's religious sense has tremendously
developed during those "dear" days. He is, comparatively speaking,
happy in his colossal self-deception, and has no idea what a rascal he
really is.

I think I have told you everything now; anything else verbally when we
meet. Until then, good-bye. I hope you are in good health and spirits.

                                               Your friend,
                                                      OLLE MONTANUS.

P.S. I must not forget to tell you the result of the antiquarian
research. The end of it all was that old Jan, an inmate of the
almshouses, remembered having seen the figures when he was a child. He
said there had been three: Faith, Hope, and Love; and as Love was the
greatest of these, it had stood above the altar. In the first decade of
this century a flash of lightning had struck Love and Faith. The
figures had been the work of his father who was a carver of
figure-heads in the naval port Karlskrona.

                                                               O. M.

When Falk had read the letters, he sat down at his writing-table,
examined his lamp to see whether there was plenty of oil in it, lit his
pipe, took a manuscript from his table-drawer, and began to write.




CHAPTER XIX

FROM CHURCHYARD TO PUBLIC-HOUSE


The September afternoon lay grey and warm and still over the capital as
Falk climbed the hills in the south. When he had arrived at the
churchyard of St. Catherine's he sat down to rest; he noticed with a
feeling of genuine pleasure that the maples had turned colour during
the recent cold nights, and he welcomed autumn with its darkness, its
grey clouds, and falling leaves.

Not a breath stirred; it was as if Nature were resting, tired after the
work of the short summer. Everything was asleep; the dead were lying
beneath the sod, calm and peaceful, as if they had never been alive; he
wished that he had all men there, and that he, himself, was with them.

The clock on the tower chimed the hour, and he rose and continued his
walk. He went down Garden Street, turned into New Street--which looked
as if it had been new a hundred years ago at least--crossed the New
Market, and came to the White Mountains.

He stood still before the spotted house, listening to the children's
chatter, for, as usual, there were children playing about the street;
they talked loudly and unreservedly while they were busy polishing
little pieces of brick, presently to be used in a game of hop-scotch.

"What did you have for dinner, Janne?"

"That's my business!"

"Your business? Did you say it was your business? Mind what you're
about or you'll get a hiding."

"Don't brag! You with your eyes!"

"Who shoved you into the lake the other day?"

"Oh! shut up!"

Janne received a thrashing, and peace was restored.

"I say! You stole cress in the churchyard the other day, didn't you,
Janne?"

"That cripple Olee split on me!"

"And you were nabbed by the police, weren't you?"

"Who cares for the police? I don't!"

"Don't you? Come along of us to-night then; we're going to pinch some
pears."

"There's a savage dog behind the fence!"

"Garn! Chimney-sweep's Peter'll climb over and a kick'll do for the
dog."

The polishing was interrupted by a maid-servant who came out of the
house and began to scatter pine branches on the grass-grown street.

"Who's going to be buried?"

"The deputy's wife's baby!"

"He's a proper old Satan, the deputy, isn't he?"

Instead of replying, the other began whistling an unknown and very
peculiar tune.

"Let's thrash his red-haired cubs when they come home from school! I
say! Doesn't his old woman fancy herself? The old she-devil locked us
out in the snow the other night because we couldn't pay the rent, and
we had to spend the night in the barn."

The conversation flickered out; the last item of conversation had not
made the smallest impression on Janne's friend.

After this introduction to the status of the tenants by the two
urchins, Falk entered the house not with the pleasantest of sensations.
He was received at the door by Struve, who looked distressed, and took
Falk's arm as if he were going to confide a secret to him, or suppress
a tear--he had to do something, so he embraced him.

Falk found himself in a big room with a dining-table, a sideboard, six
chairs, and a coffin. White sheets were hanging before the windows
through which the daylight filtered and broke at the red glow of the
tallow candles; on the table stood a tray with green wine glasses, and
a soup tureen filled with dahlias, stocks, and white asters.

Struve seized Falk's hand and led him to the coffin where the baby lay
bedded on shavings, covered with tulle, and strewn with fuchsias.

"There!" he said, "there!"

Falk felt nothing but the quite commonplace emotion the living always
feel in the presence of the dead; he could think of nothing suitable to
say, and therefore he confined himself to pressing the father's hand.
"Thank you, thank you," stammered Struve, and disappeared in an
adjoining room.

Falk was left alone; he could hear excited whispering behind the door
through which Struve had vanished; then it grew still for a while; but
presently a murmur from the other end of the room penetrated the
matchboard wall. A strident treble seemed to be reciting long verses
with incredible volubility.

"Babebibobubybäbö--Babebibobubybäbö--Babebibobubybäbö," it sounded.

An angry man's voice answered to the accompaniment of a plane which
said hwitcho--hwitcho--hwitch--hwitch--hitch--hitch.

And a long-drawn, rumbling mum-mum-mum-mum-mum-mum-mum-_m_um replied,
seemingly anxious to calm the storm. But the plane spat and sneezed
again its hwitch--hwitch, and immediately after a storm of
Babili--bebili--bibili--bobili--bubili--bybili--bäbili--bö--broke out
with fresh fury.

Falk guessed the subject under discussion, and a certain intonation
gave him the idea that the dead baby was involved in the argument.

The whispering, occasionally interrupted by loud sobs, began again
behind the door through which Struve had disappeared; finally it was
pushed open and Struve appeared leading by the hand a woman who looked
like a laundress; she was dressed in black, and her eyelids were red
and swollen with weeping. Struve introduced her with all the dignity of
a father of a family:

"My wife, Mr. Falk, my old friend."

Falk clasped a hand, hard as a beetle, and received a vinegary smile.
He cast about for a few platitudes containing the words "wife" and
"grief," and as he was fairly successful, he was rewarded by Struve
with an embrace.

Mrs. Struve, anxious not to be left out in the cold, began brushing the
back of her husband's coat.

"It's dreadful how you seem to pick up every bit of dirt, Christian,"
she said; "your back's always dusty. Don't you think that my husband
always looks like a pig, Mr. Falk?"

There was no need for poor Falk to reply to this tender remark; behind
the mother's back now appeared two heads, regarding the visitor with a
grin. The mother patted them affectionately.

"Have you ever seen plainer boys before, Mr. Falk?" she asked. "Don't
they look exactly like young foxes?"

This statement was so undeniably accurate that Falk felt compelled to
deny it eagerly.

The opening of the hall door and the entrance of two men stopped all
further civilities. The first of the new-comers was a man of thirty,
broad-shouldered, with a square head, the front of which was supposed
to represent the face; the skin looked like the half-rotten plank of a
bridge in which worms have ploughed their labyrinths; the wide mouth,
always slightly open, showed the four shining eye-teeth; whenever he
smiled his face seemed to split into two parts; his mouth opened as far
back as the fourth back tooth; not a single hair grew in the barren
soil; the nose was so badly put on that one could see through it far
into the head; on the upper part of the skull grew something which
looked like cocoa-nut matting.

Struve, who possessed the faculty of ennobling his environment,
introduced Candidate Borg as Dr. Borg. The latter, without a sign of
either pleasure or annoyance, held out his arm to his companion, who
pulled off the coat and hung it on the hinge of the front door, an act
which drew from Mrs. Struve the remark that the old house was in such
bad repair that there was not even a hall-stand.

The man who had helped Borg off with his overcoat was introduced as Mr.
Levi. He was a tall, overgrown youth; the skull seemed but a backward
development of the nasal bone, and the trunk which reached to the
knees, looked as if it had been drawn through a wire plate, in the way
in which wire is drawn; the shoulders slanted like eaves; there was no
trace of hips, the shanks ran up into the thighs; the feet were worn
out of shape like a pair of old shoes; the instep had given way. The
legs curved outward and downward, like the legs of a working man who
has carried heavy loads, or stood for the greater part of his life. He
was a pure slave-type.

The candidate had remained at the door; he had taken off his gloves,
put down his stick, blown his nose, and put back the handkerchief into
his pocket without taking the least notice of Struve's repeated
attempts to introduce him; he believed that he was still in the
entrance hall; but now he took his hat, scraped the floor with his foot
and made a step into the room.

"Good morning, Jenny! How are you?" he said, seizing Mrs. Struve's hand
with as much eagerness as if it were a matter of life and death. He
bowed, hardly perceptibly, to Falk, with the snarl of a dog who sees a
strange dog in its yard.

Young Mr. Levi followed at the heels of the candidate, responding to
his smiles, applauding his sarcasms, and generally kow-towing to his
superiority.

Mrs. Struve opened a bottle of hock and filled the glasses. Struve
raised his glass and welcomed his guests. The candidate opened his
mouth, made a canal of his tongue, poured the contents of the glass on
it, grinned as if it were physic and swallowed it.

"It's awfully sour and nasty," said Mrs. Struve; "would you prefer a
glass of punch, Henrik?"

"Yes, it _is_ very nasty," agreed the candidate, and Levi eagerly
seconded him.

The punch was brought in. Borg's face brightened; he looked for a
chair, and immediately Levi brought him one.

The party sat down round the dining-table. The strong scent of the
stocks mingled with the smell of the wine; the candles were reflected
in the glasses, the conversation became lively, and soon a column of
smoke stood above the candidate's chair. Mrs. Struve glanced uneasily
at the little sleeper near the window, but nobody saw her look.

Presently a coach stopped in the street outside the house. Everybody
rose except the candidate. Struve coughed, and in a low voice, as if he
had something unpleasant to say, he whispered:

"Shall we get ready now?"

Mrs. Struve went to the coffin and stooped over it, weeping bitterly;
when, in drawing back, she saw her husband standing behind her with the
coffin lid, she burst into loud sobs.

"There, there, compose yourself," said Struve, hastening to screw down
the lid as if he wanted to hide something. Borg, looking like a yawning
horse, gulped down another glass of punch. Mr. Levi helped Struve to
screw down the lid, displaying quite extraordinary skill; he seemed to
be packing a bale of goods.

The men shook hands with Mrs. Struve, put on their overcoats and went;
the woman warned them to be careful in going downstairs; the stairs
were old and rotten.

Struve marched in front, carrying the coffin; when he stepped into the
street and became aware of the little crowd which had collected before
the house, he felt flattered, and the devil of pride took possession
of him. He scolded the driver who had omitted to open the door and let
down the steps; to heighten the effect of his words, he spoke with
contemptuous familiarity to the tall man in livery who, hat in hand,
hastened to carry out his commands.

From the centre of the crowd, where the boy Janne was standing, came a
short, scornful cough; but when the boy saw that he was attracting
universal attention, he raised his eyes towards the chimneys, and
seemed to be eagerly looking for the sweep.

The door of the coach slammed behind the four men; a lively
conversation broke out between some of the younger members of the
mass-meeting, who now felt more at their ease.

"I say, what a swell coffin! Did you see it?"

"Yes! But did you see that there was no name on it?"

"Wasn't there?"

"No! Didn't you see it? It was quite plain."

"Why was that, then?"

"Don't you know? Because he was a bastard...."

The whip cracked, and the coach rumbled off. Falk's eyes strayed to the
window; he caught a glimpse of Mrs. Struve, who had already removed
some of the sheets, blowing out the candles; and he saw the two cubs
standing by the side of her, each with a glass of wine in his hand.

The coach rattled along, through street after street; nobody attempted
to speak. Struve, sitting with the coffin on his knees, looked
embarrassed; it was still daylight; he longed to make himself
invisible.

It was a long journey to the churchyard, but it finally came to an end.
They arrived.

A row of coaches stood before the gate. They bought wreaths and the
gravedigger took possession of the coffin. After a lengthy walk, the
small procession stopped quite at the back on the north side of the
churchyard, close to a new sandfield.

The gravedigger placed the coffin in position.

Borg commanded:

"Hold tight! Ease off! Let go!"

And the little nameless child was lowered three yards into the ground.

There was a pause; all heads were bowed and all eyes looking into the
grave, as if they were waiting for something.

A leaden sky gloomed dismally over the large, deserted sandfield, the
white poles of which looked like the shadows of little children who had
lost their way. The dark wood might have been the background in a magic
lantern show; the wind was hushed.

All of a sudden a voice rose, tremulous at first, but growing in
clearness and intensity, as if it were speaking from an inner
conviction. Levi was standing on the pall, bare-headed:

"In the safe keeping of the Most High, resting in the shadow of His
omnipotence, I say to the Eternal: Oh, Thou my stronghold, my defence
in all eternity, my God in whom I trust--Kaddisch. Lord, Almighty God,
let Thy holy name be worshipped and sanctified in the whole world. Thou
wilt, in Thy own time, renew the world. Thou wilt awaken the dead and
call them to a new life. Everlasting peace reigns in Thy kingdom. Give
us and all Israel Thy peace. Amen.

"Sleep soundly, little one, to whom no name had been given. He who
knoweth His own will give you a name; sleep soundly in the autumn
night, no evil spirits will trouble you, although you never received
the holy water; rejoice that you are spared the battle of life; you can
dispense with its pleasures. Count yourself happy that you were
permitted to go, before you knew the world; pure and stainless your
soul left its delicate tenement; therefore we will not throw earth on
your coffin, for earth is an emblem of dissolution; we will bed you in
flowers, for as a flower pierces the soil, so your soul shall rise from
the dark grave to the light; from spirit you came, to spirit you will
return."

He dropped his wreath into the little grave and covered his head.
Struve took a few steps towards him, seized his hand, and shook it
warmly; tears rolled down his cheeks, and he begged Levi for the loan
of his handkerchief. Borg, after throwing his wreath into the grave,
turned to go, and the others followed slowly.

Falk stood gazing into the open grave, plunged in deep thought. At
first he saw only a square of darkness; but gradually a bright spot
appeared which grew and took shape; it looked like a disc and shone
with the whiteness of a mirror--it was the blank shield on which the
life of the child should have been recorded. It gleamed brightly in the
darkness, reflecting the unbroken daylight. He dropped his wreath.
There was a faint, dull thud, and the light went out. He turned and
followed the others.

Arrived at the coach, there was a brief discussion. Borg cut it short.

"To the Restaurant Norrbacka!" he said, briefly.

      *       *       *       *       *

A few minutes later the party was standing in the large room on the
first floor; they were received by a girl whom Borg embraced and
kissed; this done, he pushed his hat underneath the sofa, commanded
Levi to help him off with his overcoat, and ordered a quart of punch,
twenty-five cigars, half a pint of brandy, and a sugar-loaf. Finally he
took off his coat and sat down in shirt sleeves on the only sofa in the
room.

Struve's face beamed when he saw the preparations for an orgy, and he
shouted for music. Levi went to the piano and strummed a waltz, while
Struve put his arm into Falk's and walked with him up and down the
room. He touched lightly on life in general, on grief and joy, the
inconstant nature of man, and so on, all of which went to prove that it
was a sin to mourn what the gods--he said gods, because he had already
said sin and did not wish to be taken for a pietist--had given and
taken.

This reflexion was apparently made by way of an introduction to the
waltz which he immediately after danced with the girl who brought the
bowl.

Borg filled the glasses, called Levi, nodded towards a glass, and said:

"Let's drink to our brotherly love now; later on we can be as rude as
we like."

Levi expressed his appreciation of the honour.

"Your health, Isaac!" said Borg.

"My name's not Isaac!"

"What the dickens do I care what your name is? I call you Isaac, my
Isaac."

"You're a jolly devil...."

"Devil! Shame on you, Jew!"

"We were going to be as rude as we liked...."

"We? I was, as far as you are concerned!"

Struve thought he had better interfere.

"Thank you, brother Levi, for your beautiful words," he said. "What
prayer was that?"

"Our funeral prayer!"

"It was beautiful!"

"Nothing but empty words," interposed Borg. "The infidel dog prayed
only for Israel; therefore the prayer couldn't have been meant for the
child."

"All those who are not baptized are looked upon as belonging to
Israel," replied Levi.

"And then you attacked baptism," continued Borg. "I don't allow anybody
to attack baptism--we can do that ourselves. And furthermore you
attacked the doctrine of justification by faith. Leave it alone in
future; I don't permit any outsiders to attack our religion."

"Borg's right there," said Struve; "we should draw the line at
attacking either baptism or any other of the sacred truths; and I must
beg of you not to indulge in any frivolous discussion of these things
to-night."

"You must beg of us?" sneered Borg. "Must you really? All right! I'll
forgive you if you'll hold your tongue. Play something, Isaac! Music!
Why is music mute at Cæsar's feast? Music! But none of your old
chestnuts! Play something new!"

Levi went to the piano, and played the overture to "The Mute."

"Now, let's talk," said Borg. "You are looking depressed, Mr. Falk;
have a glass with me."

Falk, who felt a certain embarrassment in Borg's company, accepted the
offer with mental reservations. But conversation languished, everybody
seemed to dread a collision.

Struve fluttered about like a moth in search of pleasure, but unable to
find it he again and again returned to the punch-table; every now and
then he danced a few steps, to keep up the fiction that the meeting was
merry and festive; but this was not the case by any means.

Levi see-sawed between piano and punch. He attempted to sing a cheerful
song, but it was so stale that nobody would listen to it.

Borg talked at the top of his voice, "in order to raise his spirits,"
as he said, but the party grew more and more silent, one might almost
have said uneasy.

Falk paced up and down the room, taciturn, portentous like a
thundercloud.

At Borg's order a tremendous supper, a "sexa" was served. The convives
took their seats amidst ominous silence. Struve and Borg drank
immoderate quantities of brandy; in the face of the latter red spots
appeared here and there, and the white of the eyes looked yellow. But
Struve resembled a varnished Edam cheese; he was uniformly red and
greasy. Beside them Falk and Levi looked like children, eating their
last supper in the society of giants.

Borg looked at Levi. "Hand the salmon to the scandal-monger," he
commanded, in order to break the monotonous silence.

Levi handed the dish to Struve. The latter pushed his spectacles on to
his forehead and spat venom.

"Shame on you, Jew," he foamed, throwing his dinner-napkin in Levi's
face.

Borg laid a heavy hand on Struve's bald pate.

"Silence, you blackguard!" he said.

"What dreadful company to be mixed up with! Let me tell you, gentlemen,
I'm too old to be treated like a schoolboy," said Struve, tremulously,
forgetting his usual _bonhomie_.

Borg, who had had enough to eat, rose from the table.

"Ugh!" he said, "what a beastly crowd you are! Pay, Isaac, I'll pay you
back later on; I'm going."

He put on his overcoat, put his hat on his head, filled a tumbler with
punch, added brandy to it, emptied it at one gulp, blew out some of the
candles in passing, smashed a few of the glasses, pocketed a handful of
cigars and a box of matches, and staggered out of the room.

"What a pity that such a genius should drink like that," said Levi
solemnly.

A moment later Borg re-entered the room, went to the dining-table, took
the candelabrum, lighted his cigar, blew the smoke into Struve's face,
put out his tongue, showed his back teeth, extinguished the lights, and
departed again. Levi rolled on the floor screaming with laughter.

"To what scum have you introduced me?" asked Falk gravely.

"Oh, my dear fellow, he's intoxicated to-night, but he's the son of
Professor Dr...."

"I didn't ask who his father was, I asked who he was," said Falk,
cutting him short, "I understand now why you allow such a dog to bully
you; but can you tell me why he associates with you?"

"I reserve my reply to all these futilities," answered Struve stiffly.

"Do reserve it, but reserve it for yourself!"

"What's the matter with you, brother Levi?" asked Struve officiously;
"you look so grave."

"It's a great pity that a genius like Borg should drink so much,"
replied Levi.

"How and when does he show his genius?" asked Falk.

"A man can be a genius without writing verse," said Struve pointedly.

"I dare say; writing verse does not pre-suppose genius, nor is a man a
genius if he behaves like a brute," said Falk.

"Hadn't we better pay and go?" remarked Struve, hurrying towards the
door.

Falk and Levi paid. When they stepped into the street it rained and the
sky was black; only the reflexion of the gas-lit town faintly
illuminated the sky. The coach had driven away; there was nothing left
for them but to turn up their collars and walk.

They had gone as far as the skittle-alley, when they were startled by
terrible yells above their heads.

"Curse you!" screamed a voice, and looking up they saw Borg rocking
himself on one of the highest branches of a lime tree. The branch
nearly touched the ground, but at the next moment it described a
tremendous curve upwards.

"Oh! Isn't it colossal!" screamed Levi. "Colossal!"

"What a madman," smiled Struve, proud of his protégé.

"Come along, Isaac!" bellowed Borg, high up in the air, "come along,
Jew, let's borrow money from each other!"

"How much do you want?" asked Levi, waving his pocket book.

"I never borrow less than fifty!"

At the next moment Borg had slid to the ground and pocketed the note.

Then he took off his overcoat.

"Put it on again immediately!" commanded Struve.

"What do you say? I'm to put it on again? Who are you to order me
about? What? Do you want a fight?"

He smashed his hat against the tree, took off coat and waistcoat, and
let the rain beat on his shirt.

"Come here, you rascal! Let's have a fight!"

He seized Struve round the waist, and, staggering backwards, both of
them fell into the ditch.

Falk hurried away as fast as he could. And for a long time he could
hear behind him outbursts of laughter and shouts of bravo. He could
distinguish Levi's voice yelling: "It's divine, it's colossal--it's
colossal!" And Borg's: "Traitor! Traitor!"




CHAPTER XX

ON THE ALTAR


The clock in the Town-hall Vaults of X-köping thundered the seventh
hour of an October evening as the manager of the Municipal Theatre came
in. He beamed as a toad may beam after a good meal; he looked happy,
but his facial muscles, not accustomed to express such emotions, drew
the skin into worried folds and disfigured him still more than usual.
He nodded patronizingly to the little shrivelled head-waiter who was
standing behind the bar counting the guests.

"Well, and how's the world treating you?" screamed the manager in
German--he had dropped the habit of speaking long ago.

"Thank you!" replied the head-waiter in the same language, and as this
was all the German the two gentlemen knew, the conversation was
continued in Swedish.

"Well, what do you think of the lad Gustav? Wasn't his Don Diego
excellent? Don't you admit that I can make actors? What?"

"There's no denying that! Fancy, that boy! It's quite true what you
said, sir. It's easier to do something with a man who hasn't been
ruined by book-learning."

"Books are the ruin of a good many people. Nobody knows that better
than I do. However, do you know anything about books? I do! You will
see queer things when young Rehnhjelm plays Horatio! I've promised him
the part, because he gave me no peace; but I've also warned him not to
look to me for any assistance. I don't want to be held responsible for
his failure; I also told him that I was allowing him to play the part
to show him how difficult it is to act when one has no talent. Oh! He
shall have such a snub that he'll never look at a part again. See if he
won't! But that isn't what I want to say to you! Have you got two
vacant rooms?"

"The two small ones?"

"Just so!"

"They're at your disposal, sir!"

"Supper for two, the best you can do! You'd better do the waiting
yourself."

He did not shout the last few words; the head-waiter bowed; he had
understood.

At this moment Falander entered the room. He took his accustomed seat
without as much as a look at the manager. The latter rose immediately.
"At eight then," he whispered, as he passed the bar and went out.

The head-waiter brought Falander a bottle of absinth, and all the usual
trimmings. As the actor seemed disinclined to enter into conversation,
the head-waiter wiped the table with his napkin; when that was no good,
he refilled the match-stand, and said:

"Supper to-night, the small rooms! Hm!"

"Of whom and of what are you talking?"

"Of him who's just gone out."

"I see! But that's unusual, he's generally so mean. Supper for one?"

"For two," replied the head-waiter, winking. "In the small rooms, hm!"

Falander pricked up his ears, but at the same time he felt ashamed to
be listening to gossip and dropped the subject; but that was not what
the head-waiter wanted.

"I wonder who it is? His wife is ill, and...."

"What does it matter to us? Let the monster sup with whom he likes!
Have you an evening paper?"

The head-waiter was saved a reply. Rehnhjelm was approaching the table,
radiant, like a man who sees a ray of light on his path.

"Leave the absinth alone to-night," he said, "and be my guest. I am
happy, I could cry."

"What has happened?" asked Falander uneasily. "Surely, he hasn't given
you a part?"

"He has, you pessimist! I'm to play Horatio...."

Falander's face clouded.

"And she'll play Ophelia."

"How do you know?"

"I feel it."

"You and your premonitions! But after all, it wasn't so difficult to
guess. Don't you think she deserves it? Have they a better Ophelia in
the whole company?"

"No, I admit that! Do you like your part?"

"Oh! It's splendid!"

"It's extraordinary how opinions differ."

"What do _you_ think?"

"I think that he is the greatest rascal at the whole court; he says Yes
to everything: 'Yes, my prince; yes, my good prince.' If he were really
Hamlet's friend, he would sometimes say No, and not always agree with
him like any other sycophant."

"Are you going to overthrow another of my ideals?"

"I will overthrow all your false idols! How can you--as long as you
look upon all paltry creations of man as great and splendid--strive
after the eternal? If you see perfection and excellence in everything
here below, how can you yearn for the really perfect? Believe me,
pessimism is the truest idealism! It is a Christian doctrine too, if
that will salve your conscience, for Christianity teaches us that the
world is a vale of tears from which death will deliver us!"

"Can't you let me believe that the world is beautiful? Can't you let me
be grateful to Him who is the giver of all good things, and rejoice in
the happiness life has to offer?"

"Yes, yes, my boy, rejoice, rejoice and believe and hope! As all men
strive for the same thing--happiness--you will have the 1,439,134,300th
part of a chance of winning it, seeing that the denominator of this
fraction represents the number of people on this earth. Is the
happiness which has come to you to-day worth the torture and
humiliations of the last few months? And moreover--what is this great
piece of luck? You have been given a part to play, a part in which you
cannot make a success--by which I don't mean that you necessarily need
be a failure. Are you sure that...."

He paused for breath.

"That Agnes will have a success in the part of Ophelia? She may make
good use of the rare chance and get as much out of the part as most
actresses do. I am sorry I made you feel sad; don't believe what I
said; after all, who knows whether I am right or wrong?"

"If I didn't know you better, I might believe you that you're jealous."

"No, my boy; nothing would please me more than to see yours and all
men's wishes speedily fulfilled; then the thoughts of men might turn to
higher things. Perhaps that is the meaning of life."

"You can afford to say that so calmly; you have had success long ago."

"Isn't this a state of mind much to be desired? We do not yearn for
happiness so much, as for the faculty of being able to smile at our
ardent efforts. I say _ardent_ advisedly."

Eight strokes thundered through the room. Falander rose hastily as if
he were going to leave, brushed his hand across his forehead and sat
down again.

"Has Agnes gone to see Aunt Beata to-night?" he asked casually.

"What makes you think so?"

"I'm merely supposing it because you are sitting here so quietly. She
told you she would read her part to her, as the time is so short,
didn't she?"

"Yes; have you seen her to-night?"

"No! On my word of honour, I haven't! Only I can't think of anything
else which would prevent her from spending a free evening with you."

"You guessed correctly. She urged me to go out and spend the evening
with friends; she thinks I'm too much at home. The dear girl! She has
such a tender and loving little heart."

"Yes, very tender!"

"I only once waited for her in vain; her aunt had kept her till late
and forgotten to send me word. I thought I was going mad and couldn't
sleep all night."

"You are referring to the evening of the sixth of July, I suppose?"

"You startle me! Are you watching us?"

"Why should I? I know of your engagement and aid you in every way I
can. And why shouldn't I know that it was Tuesday the sixth of July?
You've told me about it more than once."

"That's true!"

Neither of them spoke for a while.

"It's extraordinary," said Rehnhjelm, suddenly breaking the silence,
"that happiness can make one feel melancholy; I feel uneasy to-night,
and would much rather have spent the evening with Agnes. Let's go to
the small rooms and send for her. She could say that friends had
arrived from the country."

"She wouldn't do that; she couldn't tell a lie."

"Oh, nonsense! The woman who can't isn't born yet!"

Falander stared at Rehnhjelm with so peculiar an expression, that the
latter felt puzzled.

"I'll go and see whether the little rooms are vacant," he said after a
short pause; "we can send her a message, if they are."

"Come along then!"

Rehnhjelm made ready to follow him, but Falander kept him back.

"I'll be back in two minutes!"

He returned with a very white face, but perfectly calm.

"They are engaged," he said quietly.

"What a nuisance!"

"Let's keep each other company and be as jolly as we can!"

And they kept each other company, ate and drank and talked of life and
love and human malice; and when they had eaten and drunk and talked
enough, they went home and to bed.




CHAPTER XXI

A SOUL OVERBOARD


Rehnhjelm awoke on the following morning at four o'clock; somebody had
called his name. He sat up in bed and listened--there was not a sound.
He drew up the blind and looked out on a grey autumn morning, windy and
rainy. He went back to bed and tried to sleep, but in vain. There were
strange voices in the wind; they moaned and warned and wept and
whimpered. He tried to think of something pleasant: of his happiness.
He took his part and began to learn it; it seemed to be nothing but
_yes_, _my prince_; he thought of Falander's words and could not help
admitting that he was to some extent right. He tried to picture himself
on the stage as Horatio; he tried to picture Agnes in the part of
Ophelia, and could see in her nothing but a hypocritical schemer,
spreading nets for Hamlet at Polonius's advice. He attempted to drive
away the thought, and instead of Agnes he saw the coquettish Miss
Jacquette, who had been the last to play the part at the Municipal
Theatre.

He tried in vain to drive away these disagreeable fancies; they
followed him like gnats. At last, exhausted with the strain, he fell
asleep, but only to suffer the same torment in his dream; he roused
himself with an effort, but soon dropped off to sleep again, and
immediately the same visions disturbed him. About nine o'clock he awoke
with a scream, and jumped out of bed as if he were fleeing from evil
spirits. When he looked into the glass he saw that his eyes were red
with weeping. He dressed hastily and as he picked up his boot, a big
spider ran across the floor. The sight pleased him for he believed in
the superstition that a spider is a harbinger of happiness; his
good-humour was restored and he came to the conclusion that if a man
wanted an undisturbed night's rest, he should avoid crabs for supper.
He drank his coffee and smoked a pipe and smiled at the rain-showers
and the wind. A knock at the door aroused him from his reverie; he
started, for he was afraid of news, he could not tell why; but he
thought of the spider and calmly opened the door.

A servant handed him a letter from Falander, begging him to come to his
rooms at ten, on very important business.

Again he was assailed by the indescribable feeling of fear which had
troubled his morning slumber; he tried to while away the time until
ten. It was impossible; he dressed and went to Falander's house.

The latter had risen early; his room had been put straight and he was
ready to receive his friend. He greeted Rehnhjelm cordially, but with
unusual gravity. Rehnhjelm overwhelmed him with questions, but Falander
refused to reply before ten o'clock. Rehnhjelm's anxiety grew and he
wanted to know whether there was unpleasant news; Falander replied that
nothing on earth was unpleasant as long as one looked at things in the
right light. And he declared that many so-called unbearable situations
could be borne quite easily if only one did not exaggerate their
importance.

The time passed slowly, but at last it struck ten. A gentle double-rap
at the door relieved the tension. Falander opened at once and admitted
Agnes. Without a look at those present she drew the key from the lock,
and locked the door from the inside. A momentary embarrassment seized
her when, on turning round, she was confronted by two men instead of
only one, but her embarrassment gave way to pleasant surprise when she
recognized Rehnhjelm. Throwing off her water-proof, she ran towards
him; he took her in his arms and passionately pressed her to his heart,
as if he had not seen her for a year.

"You've been away a long time, Agnes!"

"A long time? What do you mean?"

"I feel as if I hadn't seen you for a life-time. How splendid you are
looking! Did you sleep well?"

"Do you think I look better than usual?"

"Yes! You are flushed and there are little dimples in your cheeks!
Won't you say good morning to Falander?"

The latter stood quietly listening to the conversation, but his face
was deadly white and he seemed to be absorbed in thought.

"How worn you are looking," said Agnes, crossing the room with the
graceful movements of a kitten, as Rehnhjelm released her from his
arms.

Falander made no reply. Agnes looked at him more keenly, and all at
once became aware of his thoughts. A fleeting expression of trouble
passed across her face, as the surface of a pond is rippled by the
breeze; but she immediately regained her usual serenity, glanced at
Rehnhjelm, realized the situation, and was prepared for anything.

"May we be told what important business has brought us together here,
at this early hour?" she asked gaily, putting her hand on Falander's
shoulder.

"Certainly," said the latter, with such firm resolution that her face
paled; but at the same moment he threw back his head, as if he wanted
to force his thoughts into another groove, "it's my birthday, and I
want you to have breakfast with me."

Agnes, who had seen the train rushing straight at her, felt relieved;
she burst into merry laughter and embraced Falander.

"But as breakfast has been ordered for eleven, we'll have to wait a
while. Won't you sit down?"

There was an ominous silence.

"An angel is passing through the room," said Agnes.

"You!" said Rehnhjelm, respectfully and ardently kissing her hand.

Falander looked as if he had been thrown out of his saddle, and was
making violent efforts to regain it.

"I saw a spider this morning," said Rehnhjelm, "that predicts
happiness."

"_Araignée matin: chagrin_," said Falander. "Have you never heard
that?"

"What does that mean?" asked Agnes.

"A spider on the morrow: grief and sorrow."

"Hm!"

Again they grew silent. The only sound which disturbed the stillness
was the sound of the rain beating in gusts against the windows.

"I read an awfully tragic book last night," presently remarked
Falander. "I hardly slept a wink."

"What book was that?" asked Rehnhjelm, without betraying very much
interest.

"Its title was 'Pierre Clément,' and its subject the usual woman's
game. But it was told so well that it made a great impression on me."

"May I ask what the usual woman's game is?" said Agnes.

"Faithlessness and treachery!"

"And this Pierre Clément?"

"He was, of course, betrayed. He was a young artist, in love with
another man's mistress...."

"I remember the book; I liked it very much. Wasn't she later on engaged
to a man whom she really loved? Yes, that was it, and during all the
time she kept up her old _liaison_. The author wanted to show that a
woman can love in two ways; a man only in one. That's true enough,
isn't it?"

"Certainly! But the day came when her fiancé was going to compete with
a picture. To cut my tale short, she gave herself to the president, and
Pierre Clément was happy and could be married."

"And by this the author wanted to show that a woman will sacrifice
everything to the man she loves--a man, on the other hand...."

"That is the most infamous statement I ever heard!" burst out Falander.

He rose, went to his writing-desk, threw open the flap and took out a
black box.

"Here," he said, handing it to Agnes; "go home and rid the world of a
monster."

"What's that?" laughed Agnes, opening the box and taking out a
six-barrelled revolver. "I say, what a sweet thing! Didn't you use this
as Carl Moor? I believe it is loaded."

She raised the revolver and fired up the chimney.

"Lock it up," she said, "this is no toy, my friends."

Rehnhjelm had watched the scene speechlessly. He understood the meaning
well enough, but he was unable to say a word; and he was so much under
the girl's spell, that he could not even feel angry with her. He
realized that he had been stabbed, but he had as yet not had time to
feel the pain.

The girl's impudence disconcerted Falander; he wanted time to recover;
his moral execution had been a complete failure, and his _coup de
théâtre_ had been disastrous to himself.

"Hadn't we better go now?" asked Agnes, straightening her hat before
the glass.

Falander opened the door.

"Go and be damned to you!" he said. "You have ruined an honest man's
peace of mind."

"What are you talking about? Shut the door! It's none too warm here."

"I see, I have to speak more plainly. Where were you last night?"

"Hjalmar knows, and it's no business of yours."

"You were not at your aunt's! You had supper with the manager!"

"It's a lie!"

"I saw you at nine in the vaults of the Town-hall."

"I say it's a lie! I was at home at that time! Go and ask aunt's maid
who saw me home."

"I should never have expected this from you!"

"Hadn't we better stop talking nonsense now and be off? You shouldn't
read stupid books all night; then you wouldn't be in a bad temper on
the next day. Put on your hats and come."

Rehnhjelm put his hand to his head to feel whether it was in its
accustomed place, for everything seemed to him to be turned upside
down. When he found that it was still there, he attempted to come to a
clear understanding of the matter, but he was unable to do so.

"Where were you on the sixth of July?" asked Falander, with the
sternness of a judge.

"What an idiotic question to ask! How can I remember what happened
three months ago?"

"You were with me, but you told Hjalmar you were with your aunt."

"Don't listen to him," said Agnes, going up to Rehnhjelm and caressing
him. "He's talking nonsense."

Rehnhjelm's hand shot out; he seized her by the throat and flung her on
her back behind the stove, where she fell on a little pile of wood and
remained lying still and motionless.

He put on his hat, but Falander had to help him with his coat, for he
trembled violently.

"Come along, let's be off," he said, spitting on the hearthstone.

Falander hesitated for a moment, felt Agnes' pulse and then followed
Rehnhjelm with whom he caught up in the lower hall.

"I admire you!" he said; "the matter was really beyond discussion."

"Then let it for ever remain so! We haven't much time to enjoy each
other's company. I am leaving for home by the next train, to work and
to forget! Let's go to the vaults now."

They went to the vaults and engaged a private room, where breakfast was
served to them.

"Has my hair turned grey?" asked Rehnhjelm, passing his hand over his
hair which was damp and clung closely to his skull.

"No, old man, that doesn't often happen; even I'm not grey."

"Is she hurt?"

"No!"

"It was in this room--I met her for the first time."

He rose from the table, staggered to the sofa, and threw himself on his
knees by the side of it. Burying his head in the cushions, he burst
into tears like a child crying in his mother's lap.

Falander took his head in both his hands, and Rehnhjelm felt something
hot and scalding dropping on his neck.

"Where's your philosophy now, old fellow? Out with it! I'm drowning!
Give me a straw to clutch at!"

"Poor boy! poor old boy!"

"I must see her! I must ask her forgiveness! I love her in spite of it!
In spite of it! Are you sure she isn't hurt? Oh! my God, that one can
be so unhappy and yet not die!"

      *       *       *       *       *

At three o'clock in the afternoon Rehnhjelm left for Stockholm.
Falander slammed the carriage door behind him and turned the handle.




CHAPTER XXII

HARD TIMES


To Sellén also the autumn had brought great changes. His powerful
patron had died, and all memory of him was to be blotted out; even the
memories of his kind actions were not to survive him. That Sellén's
stipend was stopped went without saying, especially as the artist could
not bring himself to petition for its continuance. He did not believe
that he required further assistance, after having been given a helping
hand once, and, moreover, there were so many younger members of his
profession in greater need of it.

But he was made to realize that not only was the sun extinguished but
that the smaller planets, too, suffered from total eclipse. He had
worked strenuously during the summer and had made great progress in his
art, but nevertheless the president declared that it had deteriorated,
and that his success in the spring had been nothing more than a stroke
of luck; the professor of landscape-painting had told him as a friend
that he would never be a great artist, and the academician had seized
the opportunity to rehabilitate himself, and clung to his first
opinion. In addition to this the public taste in pictures had changed;
the ignorant wealthy handful of people who were in the habit of buying
pictures and therefore set the fashion, did not want landscapes, but
portraits of the watering-places and summer resorts they knew; and it
was difficult to sell even these; the only demand was for sentimental
genre-pictures and half-nude figures.

Therefore Sellén had fallen on evil days, for he could not bring
himself to paint against his better judgment. He was now renting a
former photographic studio on the top of a house in Government Street.
The accommodation consisted of the studio itself, with its rotten floor
and leaking roof--the latter defect was not felt at present, for it was
winter and the roof was covered with snow--and the old dark-room which
smelt of collodium, and for this reason could only be used as a wood- or
coal-shed, when circumstances permitted the purchase of fuel. The only
piece of furniture was a wooden garden seat, studded with protruding
nails. It was so short that a man using it as a bed--and it was always
used as a bed when the owner, or rather the borrower, spent the night
at home--had either to draw his knees up to his chin, or allow his legs
to dangle over the side. The bedding consisted of half a rug--the other
half was at the pawnbroker's--and a leather case, stuffed to
bursting-point with studies and sketches.

In the dark-room was a water tap and a basin with a waste pipe--the
only substitute for a dressing-table.

On a cold afternoon, a short time before Christmas, Sellén was standing
before his easel, painting for the third time a new picture on an old
canvas. He had just risen from his hard bed; no servant had come in to
light his fire--partly because he had no servant, and partly because he
had nothing with which to make a fire--no servant had brushed his
clothes or brought his coffee. And yet he was standing before his easel
whistling merrily, engaged in painting a brilliant sunset, when there
came four knocks at the door. Sellén opened without hesitation and
admitted Olle Montanus, very plainly and very lightly clad, without an
overcoat.

"Good morning, Olle! How are you? Did you sleep well?"

"Thanks."

"How's the cash-box?"

"Oh! Bad!"

"And the notes?"

"There are so few in circulation."

"I see! They won't issue any more? And the valuables?"

"There aren't any."

"Do you think it's going to be a hard winter?"

"I saw a great many chatterers this morning; that means a hard winter."

"You took a morning stroll?"

"I've walked about all night, after leaving the Red Room at midnight."

"You were at the Red Room last night?"

"Yes; and I made two new acquaintances: Dr. Borg and a man called
Levin."

"Oh! Those rascals! I know them! Why didn't you spend the night with
them?"

"They turned up their noses at me because I had no overcoat, and I felt
ashamed. But I am worn out; I'll rest for a few moments on your sofa!
I've walked through the whole town and round half of it; I must try and
get work to-day at a stone-mason's or I shall starve."

"Is it true that you are a member of the Workmen's Union 'Star of the
North'?"

"Quite true; I'm going to lecture there on Sunday next, on Sweden."

"A good subject! Plenty to say!"

"If I should fall asleep on your sofa, don't waken me; I'm dead-beat."

"All right, old chap! Go to sleep!"

A few moments later Olle was fast asleep and snoring loudly. His head
was hanging over one of the side-railings which supported his thick
neck, and his legs over the other.

"Poor devil!" muttered Sellén, covering him up with his rug.

There was another knock, but as it was unfamiliar Sellén judged it wise
to take no notice of it; thereupon the clamour became so furious that
it dissipated his apprehensions and he opened the door to Dr. Borg and
Levin. Borg was the first to speak.

"Is Falk here?"

"No!"

"Who is that sack of wood over there?" continued Borg, pointing at Olle
with his snow-boot.

"Olle Montanus."

"Oh! That extraordinary fellow who was with Falk last night! Is he
asleep?"

"Yes."

"Did he spend the night here?"

"Yes."

"Why haven't you a fire? It's beastly cold."

"Because I have no wood."

"Send for some then! Where's the servant? I'll make her trot."

"Gone to early service."

"Wake up that sleeping ox over there and send him!"

"No, let him sleep," objected Sellén, covering up Olle, who was still
snoring loudly.

"Then I must show you another way. What's the floor-packing? Earth or
rubbish?"

"I don't understand these matters," replied Sellén, carefully stepping
on some sheets of cardboard which were lying on the floor.

"Have you got another piece of cardboard?"

"What are you driving at?" asked Sellén, colouring up to the roots of
his hair.

"I want it, and a pair of fire-tongs."

Sellén gave him the required articles, took his sketching stool and sat
down on the pieces of cardboard as if he were guarding a treasure.

Borg took off his coat, and with the help of the fire-tongs loosened a
board in the floor, rotted by rain and acids.

"Confound you! What are you doing?" exclaimed Sellén.

"I used to do this in my college days at Upsala," said Borg.

"But you can't do that sort of thing at Stockholm!"

"Hang it all, I'm cold! I must have a fire."

"But there's no necessity to break up the floor in the middle of the
room! It shows too much!"

"What does that matter to me! I don't live here. But this is too hard."

Meanwhile he had approached Sellén, and all of a sudden he pushed him
and the stool over; in falling the artist dragged the pieces of
cardboard with him, exposing the bare floor-packing underneath.

"Miscreant! To have a perfect timber-yard and not to say a word about
it!"

"The rain's done it!"

"I don't care who's done it! Let's light a fire!"

He wrenched off a few pieces of wood with his strong hands and soon a
fire was blazing in the grate.

Levin had watched the scene, quiet, neutral, and polite. Borg sat down
before the fire and made the tongs red-hot.

Again there was a knock: three short raps and a longer one.

"That's Falk," said Sellén, opening the door.

Falk entered, looking a little hectic.

"Do you want money?" said Borg to the newcomer, laying his hand on his
breast-pocket.

"What a question to ask," said Falk, looking at him doubtfully.

"How much do you want? I can let you have it."

"Are you serious?" asked Falk, and his face cleared.

"Serious? Hm! How much? The figure! The amount!"

"I could do with, say, sixty crowns."

"Good Lord, how modest you are," remarked Borg, and turned to Levin.

"Yes, it _is_ very little," said the latter. "Take as much as you can
get Falk while the purse is open."

"I'd rather not! Sixty crowns is all I want, and I can't afford to take
up a bigger loan. But how is it to be paid back?"

"Twelve crowns every sixth month, twenty-four crowns per annum, in two
instalments," said Levin promptly and firmly.

"Those are easy terms," replied Falk. "Where do you get money on those
terms?"

"From the Wheelwrights' Bank. Give me paper and a pen, Levin!"

Quick as lightning Levin produced a promissory note, a pen, and a
pocket inkstand. The note had already been filled up by the others.
When Falk saw the figure eight hundred he hesitated for a moment.

"Eight hundred crowns?" he asked.

"You can have more if you are not satisfied."

"No, I won't; it's all the same who takes the money as long as it is
paid up all right. But can you raise money on a bill of this sort,
without security?"

"Without security? You are forgetting that we are guaranteeing it,"
replied Levin, with contemptuous familiarity.

"I don't want to depreciate it," observed Falk. "I'm grateful for your
guarantees, but I don't believe that the bill will be accepted."

"Oh, won't it! It's accepted already," said Borg, bringing out a _bill
of acceptance_, as he called it. "Go on, Falk, sign!"

Falk signed his name.

Borg and Levin were watching him, looking over his shoulders like
policemen.

"Assessor," dictated Borg.

"No, I'm a journalist," objected Falk.

"That's no good; you are registered as assessor, and as such you still
figure in the directory."

"Did you look it up?"

"One should be correct in matters of form," said Borg gravely.

Falk signed.

"Come here, Sellén, and witness," commanded Borg.

"I don't know whether I ought to," replied Sellén, "I've seen at home,
in the country, so much misery arising from such signatures...."

"You are not in the country now, and you are not dealing with peasants.
There's no reason why you shouldn't witness that Falk's signature is
genuine."

Sellén signed, shaking his head.

"And now rouse that draught-ox over there and make him, too, witness
the signature."

When all shaking was in vain Borg took the tongs, which were now
red-hot, and held them under the sleeper's nostrils.

"Wake up, you dog, and you shall have something to eat!"

Olle jumped up and rubbed his eyes.

"You are to witness Falk's signature. Do you understand?"

Olle took the pen and wrote his name in obedience to the two
guarantors' dictation. When he had done so, he turned to the bench to
lie down again but Borg prevented him.

"Wait a minute," he said, "Falk must first sign a counter-guarantee."

"Don't do it, Falk," said Olle; "it'll end badly, there'll be trouble."

"Silence, you dog," bellowed Borg. "Come here, Falk! We've just
guaranteed your bill, as you know; all we want now from you is a
counter-guarantee in place of Struve's, against whom an action has been
brought."

"What do you mean by a counter-guarantee?"

"It's only a matter of form; the loan was for eight hundred crowns on
the Painters' Bank; the first payment has been made, but now that
Struve has been proceeded against, we must find a substitute. It's a
safe old loan and there are no risks; the money was due a year ago."

Falk signed and the other two witnessed.

Borg carefully folded the bills and gave them to Levin who immediately
turned to go.

"I'll give you an hour," said Borg. "If you are not back with the money
by then, I'll set the police on your track."

And satisfied with his morning's work, he stretched himself out on the
seat on which Olle had been lying.

The latter staggered to the fire, lay down on the floor and curled
himself up like a dog.

For a little while nobody spoke.

"I say, Olle," said Sellén presently, breaking the silence, "supposing
we signed a bill of this sort...."

"You would be sent to Rindö," said Borg.

"What is Rindö?" asked Sellén.

"A convict prison in the Skerries; but in case the gentlemen should
prefer the Lake of Mälar, there's a prison there called Longholm."

"But seriously," said Falk, "what happens if one can't pay on the day
when the money falls due?"

"One takes up a fresh loan at the Tailors' Bank, for instance," replied
Borg.

"Why don't you go to the Imperial Bank?" questioned Falk.

"Because it's rotten!" answered Borg.

"Can you make head or tail out of all this?" said Sellén to Olle.

"I don't understand a word of it," answered the latter.

"You will, when you are members of the Academy, and your names appear
in the Directory."




CHAPTER XXIII

AUDIENCES


Nicholas Falk was sitting in his office; it was the morning of the day
before Christmas Eve. He was a little changed; time had thinned his
fair hair, and the passions had delved little channels in his face, for
the acids which the parched soil distilled. He was stooping over a
little book of the shape and size of the Catechism, and his busy pen
seemed to prick out designs.

There was a knock at the door; immediately the book disappeared beneath
the flap of his writing-desk, and was replaced by the morning paper.
Falk was absorbed in its perusal when his wife entered.

"Take a seat," he said, politely.

"No, thank you; I'm in a hurry. Have you read the morning paper?"

"No!"

"But you are reading it at this very minute!"

"I've only just taken it up."

"Have you seen the review of Arvid's poems?"

"Yes."

"Well? They were much praised."

"He wrote the review himself."

"You said the same thing last night when you were reading the _Grey
Bonnet_."

"What have you come here for?"

"I've just met the admiral's wife; she's accepted our invitation and
said she would be delighted to meet the young poet."

"Did she really?"

"She did, indeed."

"Hm! Of course it's possible to make a mistake, although I don't admit
that I made one. I suppose you're again wanting money?"

"Again? How long ago is it since you gave me any?"

"Here you are, then! But now go, and don't bother me again before
Christmas; you know it's been a bad year."

"Indeed! I don't know that at all! Everybody says it's been a splendid
year."

"For the agriculturist yes, but not for the insurance societies. Run
away now!"

Mrs. Falk went, making way for Fritz Levin, who entered cautiously, as
if he were afraid of a trap.

"What have you come for?" asked Falk.

"Oh, I just wanted to wish you a good morning in passing."

"A good idea! I've been wanting to see you."

"Have you really?"

"You know young Levi?"

"Of course I do!"

"Read this paper, aloud, please!"

Levin read, in a loud voice: "Magnificent bequest: With a generosity
which is not now infrequently met with among the merchant class, the
wholesale merchant Mr. Charles Nicholas Falk, in order to commemorate
the anniversary of a happy marriage, has bequeathed to the crèche
'Bethlehem' the sum of twenty thousand crowns, one half of it to be
paid at once, and the other half after the death of the generous donor.
The bequest is all the more significant as Mrs. Falk is one of the
founders of the philanthropic institution."

"Will that do?" asked Falk.

"Splendidly! The new year will bring you the order of Vasa!"

"I want you to take the deed of gift and the money to the
Administrative Committee of the crèche, that is to say, to my wife, and
then go and find young Levi. Do you understand?"

"Quite."

Falk gave him the deed of gift, written on parchment, and the amount.

"Count the money to see whether it is right."

Levin opened a packet of papers and stared, wide-eyed, at fifty sheets
covered with lithographic designs, in all possible colours.

"Is that money?" he asked.

"These are securities," answered Falk; "fifty shares at two hundred
crowns each in the 'Triton,' which I bequeath to the crèche Bethlehem."

"Haha! It's all over with the 'Triton,' then, and the rats are leaving
the sinking ship!"

"I didn't say that," replied Falk, laughing maliciously.

"But if it should be the case, the crèche will be bankrupt."

"That doesn't concern me, and it concerns you even less. But there is
something else I want you to do. You must--you know what I mean when I
say you must...."

"I know, I know, bailiffs, promissory notes--go on!"

"You must induce Arvid to come here to dinner on Bank Holiday...."

"It will be about as easy as bringing you three hairs out of the
giant's beard. Now do you admit that I was wise when I refused to give
him your message of last spring? Haven't I always predicted this?"

"Did you? Well, never mind, hold your tongue and do as you are told! So
much for that! There's another thing! I have noticed symptoms of
remorse in my wife. She must have met her mother, or one of her
sisters. Christmas is a sentimental season. Go to my mother-in-law and
stir up a little strife!"

"A very unpleasant commission!"

"Off you go! Next man...."

Levin went. The next visitor was schoolmaster Nyström, who was admitted
by a secret door in the background. At his entrance the morning paper
was dropped, and the long, narrow book reappeared.

Nyström had gone to pieces. His body was reduced to a third of its
former size, and his clothes were extremely shabby. He remained humbly
standing at the door, took a much-used pocket-book out of his pocket
and waited.

"Ready?" asked Falk, keeping the place in the book with his first
finger.

"Ready," replied Nyström, opening the pocket-book.

"No. 26. Lieutenant Kling, 1500 crowns. Paid?"

"Not paid."

"Prolong, with extra interest and commission. Call at his private
address."

"Never receives at home."

"Threaten him by post with a visit at the barracks."

"No. 27. Judge Dahlberg, 800 crowns. Let's see. Son of the wholesale
merchant Dahlberg, estimated at 35,000. Grant a respite at present, but
see that he pays the interest. Keep an eye on him."

"He never pays the interest."

"Send him a postcard to his office."

"No. 28. Captain Stjernborst, 4000. Good for nothing fellow, that!
Paid?"

"Not paid."

"Good. Instructions: Call on him at noon at the guards room. Dress--you
that is--compromisingly. Your red overcoat with the yellow seams, you
know what I mean."

"No use! I've called on him at the guards room in the depth of the
winter without any overcoat."

"Then go to his guarantors!"

"I've been and they told me to go to hell. They said that a guarantee
was only a matter of form."

"Then call on him on a Wednesday afternoon at one o'clock at the
offices of the 'Triton'; take Andersson with you, then there'll be two
of you."

"Been done already."

"Has it? How did the directors take it?" asked Falk, rising.

"They were embarrassed."

"Really? Much embarrassed?"

"Much embarrassed."

"And he himself?"

"He took us into the corridor and promised to pay if we never called on
him there again."

"Indeed! He spends two hours a week there, and receives six thousand
crowns, because his name is Stjernborst. Let's see! It's Saturday
to-day. Be at the 'Triton' punctually at half-past twelve; if you
should see me there, which I expect you will, not a flicker of an
eyelid. Do you understand? Right! Any fresh business?"

"Thirty-five new requests."

"Yes, yes, it's Christmas Eve to-morrow."

Falk turned over a bundle of promissory notes; every now and then he
smiled, or muttered a word.

"Good Heavens! Has he come to that? And this one--and that one--who was
looked upon as such a steady fellow! Yes, yes--hard times are in store
for all of us. Oh! He, too, wants money? Then I shall buy his
house...."

Another knock at the door. The desk was closed, papers and catechism
vanished into thin air, and Nyström disappeared through the secret
door.

"At half-past twelve," whispered Falk, as he went. "One thing more!
Have you finished the poem?"

"Yes," replied a muffled voice.

"Right! Keep Levin's promissory note in readiness, so that it can be
submitted to his head office at any time. Some day I shall smash him.
The rascal's deceitful."

He arranged his tie, pulled out his cuffs and opened the door leading
to a little waiting-room.

"Ah! Good morning, Mr. Lundell! Very glad to see you! Please come in!
How are you? I had locked my door for a few moments."

It really was Lundell; Lundell dressed in the height of fashion like a
shop assistant; he wore a watch-chain, rings, gloves and overshoes.

"I am not calling at an inconvenient time, I hope?"

"Not at all! Do you think, Mr. Lundell, that you will be able to finish
it by to-morrow?"

"Must it be finished by to-morrow?"

"It absolutely must! It will be a red-letter day for the crèche
to-morrow; Mrs. Falk will publicly present my portrait to the
institution, to be hung in the dining-room."

"Then we must not let any obstacles stand in our way," replied Lundell,
taking an easel and an almost finished canvas from a cupboard. "If you
will sit to me for a few moments, sir, I will give the picture the
finishing touches."

"With all the pleasure in the world."

Falk sat down in a chair, crossed his legs, threw himself into the
attitude of a statesman and tried to look aristocratic.

"Won't you talk, sir? Although your face is an exceedingly interesting
one when at rest, yet the more characteristics I can bring out, the
better."

Falk smirked; a glimmer of pleasure and gratification lit up his coarse
features.

"I hope you'll be able to dine with us on bank holiday, Mr. Lundell?"

"Thank you...."

"You'll be able to study the faces of many men of distinction, then,
men whose features deserve being fixed on canvas far more than mine
do."

"Perhaps I may have the honour of painting them?"

"You will, if I recommend you."

"Oh, do you really think so?"

"Certainly I do!"

"I just caught a new expression in your face. Try and keep it for a few
moments. There! This is excellent! I'm afraid I shall have to work at
this portrait all day long. There are so many details which one only
discovers gradually. Your face is rich in interesting features."

"In that case we had better dine together! We must see a good deal of
each other, Mr. Lundell, so that you may have an opportunity of
studying my face for a second edition, which it is always well to have.
Really, I must say, there are few people to whom I felt so strongly
drawn from the first moment, as I did to you, Mr. Lundell."

"Oh, my dear sir!"

"And let me tell you that my eyes are keen and well able to distinguish
truth from flattery."

"I knew that from the first," answered Lundell unscrupulously. "My
profession has given me an insight into human character."

"You are a very keen observer indeed. Not everybody understands me. My
wife, for instance...."

"Oh! Women cannot be expected...."

"No, that wasn't altogether what I meant. But may I offer you a glass
of good old port?"

"Thank you, sir; I never drink when I'm working, on principle...."

"Quite right! I respect this principle--I always respect
principles--all the more because I share it."

"But when I'm not at work, I enjoy a glass."

"Just as I do."

It struck half-past twelve. Falk rose.

"Excuse me, I must leave you for a short time, on business. I shall be
back almost immediately."

"Certainly, business first."

Falk put on his hat and coat and went. Lundell was left alone.

He lit a cigar and studied the portrait. No observer, however keen,
could have guessed his thoughts; he had acquired sufficient knowledge
of the art of life to hide his opinions even when he was alone; nay,
more than that, he was afraid of coming to a clear understanding with
himself.




CHAPTER XXIV

ON SWEDEN


They had arrived at the dessert. The champagne sparkled in the glasses
which reflected the rays of light from the chandelier in Nicholas
Falk's dining-room. Arvid was greeted on all sides with friendly
hand-shakes, compliments and congratulations, warnings and advice;
everybody wanted to be present and share in his triumph, for he had had
a decided success.

"Assessor Falk! I'm delighted!" said the President of the Board of
Payment of Employés' Salaries, nodding to him across the table. "I
fully appreciate your talent."

Arvid tranquilly pocketed the insulting compliment.

"Why are your poems so melancholy?" asked a young beauty on the poet's
right. "One might almost think you were suffering from an unhappy
love-affair."

"Assessor Falk, allow me to drink your health," said the chief editor
of the _Grey Bonnet_, from the left, stroking his long, blond beard.
"Why don't you write for my paper?"

"I shouldn't think you would print my articles," replied Arvid.

"I don't see why we shouldn't."

"Our opinions differ so very widely...."

"Oh! That isn't half as bad as you think. One compromises. We have no
opinions."

"Your health, Falk!" shouted the excited Lundell, from the other side
of the table. "Your health!"

Levi and Borg had to hold him, otherwise he would have risen and made
a speech. It was for the first time that Lundell was invited to a
dinner of this sort, and the brilliant assembly and luxurious food and
drink intoxicated him; but as all the guests were more or less merry,
he fortunately excited no unpleasant attention.

Arvid Falk's heart beat faster at the sight of all these people who had
readmitted him to their circle without asking for explanations or
apologies. It gave him a sense of security to sit on those old chairs,
which had been a part of the home of his childhood. With a feeling of
melancholy he recognized the tall table-centre which in the old times
had only seen daylight once a year. But the number of new people
distracted him; their friendly faces did not deceive him; certainly
they did not wish him evil, but their friendship depended on a
combination of circumstances.

Moreover, he saw the whole entertainment in the light of a masquerade.
What mutual interest could possibly form a bond between his uncultured
brother and Professor Borg, the man with the great scientific
reputation? They were shareholders in the same company! What was the
proud Captain Gyllenborst doing here? Had he come for the sake of the
dinner? Impossible, even though a man will go a long way for the sake
of a good dinner. And the President? The Admiral? There must have been
invisible ties, strong, unbreakable ties perhaps.

The mirth increased, but the laughter was too shrill; the lips were
overflowing with wit, but the wit was biting. Falk felt ill at ease; it
seemed to him that his father's eyes were looking angrily at the
assembly from the painted canvas which hung over the piano.

Nicholas Falk beamed with satisfaction; he neither saw nor heard any
unpleasantness, but he avoided meeting his brother's eyes as much as
possible. They had not spoken to each other yet, for Arvid, in
compliance with Levin's instructions, had not arrived until after all
the guests had been assembled.

The dinner was approaching its end. Nicholas made a speech on "the
stamina and firm resolution" which are necessary to accomplish a man's
purpose: the achievement of financial independence and a good social
position. "These two qualities," said the speaker, "raise a man's
self-respect and endow him with that firmness without which his efforts
are unavailing, at any rate as far as the general good is concerned.
And the general welfare, gentlemen, must always be our highest
endeavour; I have no doubt that--if the truth were known--it is the
ambition of every one here present. I drink the health of all those who
have this day honoured my house, and I hope that I may often--in the
future--enjoy the same privilege."

Captain Gyllenborst, who was slightly intoxicated, replied in a
lengthy, facetious speech which, delivered at a different house, before
people in a different mood, would have been called scandalous.

He abused the commercial spirit which was spreading, and declared that
he had plenty of self-respect, although he was by no means financially
independent; he had been obliged, this very morning, to settle some
business of a most disagreeable nature--but in spite of this he had
sufficient strength of character to be present at the banquet; and as
far as his social position was concerned, it was second to none--he
felt sure that this was everybody's opinion, for otherwise he would not
be sitting at this table, the guest of so charming a host.

When he had concluded, the party drew a breath of relief. "It was as if
a thundercloud had passed over our heads," remarked the beauty, and
Arvid Falk heartily agreed.

There was so much humbug, so much deceit in the atmosphere that Arvid
longed to take his leave. These people, who appeared so honest and
respectable, seemed to be held by an invisible chain at which they tore
every now and then with suppressed fury. Captain Gyllenborst treated
his host with open, though facetious contempt. He smoked a cigar in
the drawing-room, generally behaved like a boor, and took no notice
whatever of the ladies. He spat in the fire-place, mercilessly
criticized the oleographs on the walls, and loudly expressed his
contempt for the mahogany furniture. The other gentlemen were
indifferent; they gave Falk the impression that they were on duty.

Irritated and upset, he left the party unnoticed.

In the street below stood Olle waiting for him.

"I really didn't think you would come," said Olle. "It's so beautifully
light up there."

"What a reason! I wish you'd been there!"

"How is Lundell getting on in smart society?"

"Don't envy him. He won't have an easy time if he's going to make his
way as a portrait-painter. But let's talk of something else. I have
been longing for this evening, so as to study the working man at close
quarters. It will be like a breath of fresh air after these deadly
fumes; I feel as if I were allowed to take a stroll in the wood, after
having long been laid up in a hospital. I wonder whether I shall be
disillusioned."

"The working man is suspicious; you will have to be careful."

"Is he generous? Free from pettiness? Or has the pressure which has
lain on him for so long spoiled him?"

"You'll be able to see for yourself. Most things in this world differ
from our expectations."

"That's true, unfortunately."

Half an hour later they had arrived in the great hall of the working
men's union "Star of the North." The place was already crowded. Arvid's
black dress-coat did not create a good impression; he caught many an
unfriendly glance from angry eyes.

Olle introduced Arvid to a tall, gaunt man with a face full of passion,
who seemed to be troubled with an incessant cough.

"Joiner Eriksson!"

"That's me," said the latter, "and is this one of those gentlemen who
want to put up for election? He doesn't look big enough for that."

"No, no," said Olle, "he's here for the newspaper."

"Which newspaper? There are so many different sorts. Perhaps he's come
to make fun of us?"

"No, no, nothing of the sort," said Olle. "He's a friend, and he'll do
all he can for you."

"I see! That alters the matter. But I don't trust those gentlemen; one
of them lived with us, that is to say, we lived in the same house, in
the White Mountains; he was the landlord's agent--Struve was the
rascal's name."

There was a rap with the hammer. The chair was taken by an elderly man,
Wheelwright Löfgren, alderman and holder of the medal _Litteris et
artibus_. He had held many offices and acquired a great deal of
dramatic routine. A certain venerability, capable of quelling storms
and silencing noisy meetings, characterized him. His broad face,
ornamented by side-whiskers and a pair of spectacles, was framed by a
judge's wig.

The secretary who sat at his side was one of the supernumeraries of the
great Board of Functionaries; he wore eye-glasses and expressed with a
peasant's grin his dissatisfaction with everything that was said.

The front bench was filled by the most aristocratic members of the
Union: officers, Government officials, wholesale merchants; they
supported all loyal resolutions, and with their superior parliamentary
skill voted against every attempt at reform.

The secretary read the minutes, which the front bench approved.

Next the first item of the agenda was read:

"The Preparatory Committee would suggest that the working men's union
'Star of the North' should express the dissatisfaction which every
right-thinking citizen must feel in regard to the unlawful movements
which under the name of strikes are spreading nearly all over Europe."

"Is this the pleasure of the Union?"

"Yes, yes!" shouted the front bench.

"Mr. President!" called out the joiner from the White Mountains.

"Who is making so much noise at the back?" asked the chairman, looking
over his spectacles with a face which suggested that he would presently
have recourse to the cane.

"Nobody is making any noise; I am asking for permission to speak."

"Who is I?"

"Master-joiner Eriksson."

"Are you a master? Since when?"

"I am a journeyman out of my time; I have never had the means to be
made free of the city, but I am every bit as skilful as any other
master and I work on my own account."

"I request the journeyman-joiner Eriksson to sit down and stop
interfering. Is it the pleasure of the Union to reply to the question
in the affirmative?"

"Mr. Chairman!"

"What is the matter?"

"I ask permission to speak! Let me speak!" bellowed Eriksson.

There was a murmur on the back benches: "Eriksson's turn to speak."

"Journeyman Eriksson--do you spell your name with an x or a z?" asked
the chairman, prompted by the secretary.

The front bench shook with laughter.

"I don't spell, gentlemen, I discuss," said the joiner with blazing
eyes. "I discuss, I say. If I had the gift of making speeches, I should
show you that the strikers are right; for if masters and principals
grow fat because they have nothing to do but to fawn and cringe at
levees, and similar ceremonies, the working man must pay the piper with
his sweat. We know why you won't pay us just wages; it's because we
should get the Parliamentary vote, and that's what you are afraid
of...."

"Mr. Chairman!"

"Captain von Sporn!"

"Mr. Chairman, gentlemen! It is much to be regretted that at a meeting
of this Union, which has a reputation for dignified conduct (last
displayed at the Royal wedding), people without the smallest trace of
Parliamentary tact should be permitted to compromise a respectable
society by a shameless and reckless contempt of all seemliness. Believe
me, gentlemen, such a thing could never have happened in a country
where from early youth military discipline...."

"Conscription," said Eriksson to Olle.

"... had been the rule; where the habit of controlling oneself and
others had been acquired! I believe I am expressing the general feeling
of the meeting when I say that I hope that such a distressing scene may
never again occur amongst us. I say us--for I, too, am a working
man--we all are in the sight of the Eternal--and I say it as a member
of this Union. The day would be a day of mourning when I should find
myself compelled to withdraw the words which I recently uttered at
another meeting (it was at the meeting of the National League of
Promoters of Conscription), the words: 'I have a high opinion of the
Swedish working man.'"

"Hear, hear! Hear, hear!"

"Does the meeting accept the suggestion of the Preparatory Committee?"

"Yes! Yes!"

"Second item: At the instigation of several members of the Union, the
Preparatory Committee submit to the meeting the proposal to collect a
sum, not exceeding three thousand crowns, as a testimonial to the Duke
of Dalsland at his forthcoming confirmation. The gift is to be an
expression of the gratitude of the working man to the Royal Family and,
more especially, of his disapproval of those working men's
disturbances which under the name of 'Commune' devastated the French
capital."

"Mr. Chairman!"

"Doctor Haberfeld!"

"No, it's I, Eriksson; I ask permission to say a few words."

"Oh! Well! Eriksson has permission to speak."

"I merely want to point out that not the working men, but officials,
lawyers, officers--conscripts--and journalists were to blame for the
Commune at Paris. If I had the gift of making speeches, I should ask
those gentlemen to express their ideas in an album of confessions."

"Does the meeting agree to the proposal?"

"Yes, yes!"

And the clerks began to write and to check and to chatter, exactly as
they had done at the Parliamentary meetings.

"Are things always managed in this way?" asked Falk.

"Don't you think it amusing, sir?" said Eriksson. "It's enough to turn
one's hair grey. I call it corruption and treachery. Nothing but
meanness and selfishness. There isn't a man amongst them who has the
cause really at heart. And therefore the things which must happen will
happen."

"What things?"

"We'll see!" said the joiner, taking Olle's hand. "Are you ready? Hold
your own ground, you'll be sharply criticized."

Olle nodded slyly.

"Stonemason, journeyman, Olle Montanus has announced a lecture on
Sweden; the subject is a big one. But if he will promise not to exceed
half an hour, we will hear what he has got to say. What do you say,
gentlemen?"

"Hear! Hear!"

"If you please, Mr. Montanus."

Olle shook himself like a dog about to jump, and threaded his way
through the assembly, who examined him with curious eyes.

The chairman began a brief conversation with the front bench, and the
secretary yawned before taking up a newspaper, to show the meeting that
he, for one, was not going to listen.

Olle stepped on the platform, lowered his heavy eyelids and moved his
jaws, pretending to be speaking; when the room had grown really silent,
so silent that everybody could hear what the chairman said to the
captain, he began:

"On Sweden. Some points of view."

And after a pause:

"Gentlemen! It might be more than an unfounded supposition to say that
the most productive idea and the most vigorous striving of our times is
the suppression of short-sighted patriotism, which divides nations and
pits them against one another as foes; we have seen the means used to
gain this object, namely, international exhibitions and their results:
honorary diplomas."

The audience looked puzzled. "What's he driving at?" said Eriksson.
"It's rather unexpected, but it sounds all right."

"Now, as in the past, Sweden marches at the head of civilization; she
has more than any other nation spread the cosmopolitan ideal, and if
one may rely on statistics, she has attained a great deal.
Exceptionally favourable circumstances have contributed to this result.
I will examine them shortly, and then pass on to lighter subjects such
as the form of government, the ground-tax, and so on."

"It's going to be rather long," said Eriksson, nudging Arvid, "but he's
an amusing chap."

"Sweden, as everybody knows, was originally a German colony, and the
Swedish language, which has been preserved fairly pure to our days, is
neither more nor less than Low-German and its twelve dialects. This
circumstance--I mean the difficulty of communicating with one another,
experienced by the provinces--has been a powerful factor in
counteracting the development of that unhealthy national feeling. Other
fortunate facts have opposed a one-sided German influence which had
reached its pinnacle when Sweden became a German province under
Albrecht of Mecklenburg. The foremost of these facts is the conquest of
the Danish provinces: Scania, Halland, Bleking, Bohuslän, and Dalsland;
Sweden's richest provinces are inhabited by Danes who still speak the
language of their country and refuse to acknowledge the Swedish rule."

"What in the name of fortune is he getting at? Is he mad?"

"The inhabitants of Scania, for instance, to this day look upon
Copenhagen as their capital, and constitute the opposition in
Parliament. The same thing applies to the Danish Göteborg, which does
not acknowledge Stockholm as the capital of the realm. An English
settlement has sprung up there and English influence is predominant.
These people, the English people, fish in the waters near the coast,
and during the winter very nearly all the wholesale trade is in their
hands; they return to their own country in the summer and enjoy their
winter profits in their villas in the Scotch Highlands. Very excellent
people, though! They have even their own newspaper, in which they
commend their own actions, without, it must be admitted, blaming those
of others.

"Immigration is another factor of the utmost importance. We have the
Fins in the Finnish forests, but we also have them in the capital,
where they took refuge when the political situation drove them out of
their own country. In all our more important iron-works you will find a
fair number of Walloons; they came over in the seventeenth century and
to this day speak their broken French. You all know that we owe the new
Swedish constitution to a Walloon. Capable people, these Walloons, and
very honest!"

"What in the name of heaven does it all mean?"

"In the reign of King Gustavus Adolphus a whole cargo of Scotch scum
landed on our coast and took service in the army; they eventually
forced their way into the House of Knights. At the East coast there are
many families who cherish traditions of their immigration from Livland
and other Slavonic provinces, and so it is not surprising that we
frequently meet here pure Tartar types.

"I maintain that the Swedish nation is fast becoming denationalized.
Open a book on heraldry and count the Swedish names! If they exceed 25
per cent. you may cut off my nose, gentlemen! Open the directory at
random! I counted the letter G, and of four hundred names two hundred
were foreign.

"What is the cause of this? There are many causes, but the principal
ones are the foreign dynasties and the wars of conquest. If one thinks
of all the scum that has sat on the Swedish throne at one time or
another, one cannot help marvelling that the nation is so loyal to the
king. The constitutional law that the kings of Sweden shall be
foreigners is bound to be of the greatest assistance in the work of
denationalization; this has been proved to be a fact.

"I am convinced that the country will gain by its alliance with foreign
nations; it cannot lose anything--because it has nothing to lose. The
country has no nationality; Tegnér discovered that in 1811, and
short-sightedly bemoaned the fact. But his discovery came too late, for
the race had already been ruined by the constant recruiting for the
foolish wars of conquest. Of the one million men which inhabited the
country in the days of Gustavus Adolphus, seventy thousand enlisted and
were killed in the wars. I do not know for how many Charles X, Charles
XI, and Charles XII were responsible; but it is easy to picture the
offspring of those who remained behind, the men whom the crown had
rejected as unfit for service.

"I repeat my statement that Sweden has no nationality. Can anybody tell
me of anything Swedish in Sweden except her firs, pine trees, and
iron-mines? And the latter will soon disappear from the market. What is
our folk-lore but bad translations of French, English, and German
ballads? What are the national costumes, the disappearance of which we
so keenly regret, other than fragments and tatters of the aristocratic
mediæval costumes? In the days of Gustavus I the dalesmen demanded that
all those who wore low-cut or many-coloured dresses should be punished.
Probably the gay court-dress from Burgundy had not yet filtered down to
the daleswomen. But since then the fashion has changed many times.

"Tell me of a Swedish poem, a work of art, a piece of music, so
specifically Swedish that it differs from all other not-Swedish ones!
Show me a Swedish building! There isn't one, and if there were, it
would either be bad architecture or built in a foreign style.

"I don't think I'm exaggerating when I maintain that the Swedish nation
is a stupid, conceited, slavish, envious, and uncouth nation. And for
this reason it is approaching its end, and approaching it with giant
strides."

A tumult arose in the hall, but shouts of Charles XII could be heard
above the turmoil.

"Gentlemen, Charles XII is dead; let him sleep until his next jubilee.
To no one are we more indebted for our denationalisation than to him,
and therefore, gentlemen, I call for three cheers for Charles XII!
Gentlemen, long live Charles XII!"

"I call the meeting to order!" shouted the chairman.

"Is it possible to imagine that a nation can be guilty of a greater
piece of folly than to go to foreign nations in order to learn to write
poetry?

"What unsurpassable oxen they must have been to walk for sixteen
hundred years behind the plough and never conceive the idea of
inventing a song!

"Then a jolly fellow of the court of Charles XII came along and
destroyed the whole work of denationalization. The literary language,
which up to now had been German, was henceforth to be Swedish: Down
with the dog Stjernhjelm!

"What was his name? Edward Stjernström!"

The chairman's hammer came down on the table with a bang. The
disturbance grew. "Stop him! Down with the traitor! He's laughing at
us!"

"The Swedish nation can scream and brawl, I am aware of that! They can
do nothing else! And as you will not allow me to continue my lecture
and discuss the Government and the royal copyholds, I will conclude by
saying that the servile louts whom I have heard to-night are ripe for
the autocracy which they are sure to get. Believe my words: You will
have an absolute monarchy before very long!"

A push from the back jerked the words of the speaker out of his throat.
He clung to the table:

"And an ungrateful race who will not listen to the truth...."

"Kick him out! Tear him to pieces!"

Olle was dragged from the platform; but to the last moment, while
knocks and blows rained down on him, he yelled like a madman: "Long
live Charles XII! Down with George Stjernhjelm!"

At last Olle and Arvid were standing in the street.

"Whatever were you thinking of?" asked Falk. "You must have taken leave
of your senses!"

"I believe I had! I had learnt my speech by heart for the last six
weeks; I knew to a word what I was going to say; but when I stood on
the platform and saw all those eyes gazing at me, it all went to
pieces; my artificial arguments broke down like a scaffolding; the
floor underneath my feet gave way, and my thoughts became confusion.
Was it very crazy?"

"Yes, it was bad, and the papers will pull you to pieces."

"That's a pity, I admit. I thought I was making it all so clear. But it
_was_ fun to give it them for once."

"You only injured your cause; they'll never let you speak again."

Olle sighed.

"Why in the name of fortune couldn't you leave Charles XII alone? That
was your worst mistake."

"Don't ask me! I don't know!"

"Do you still love the working man?" asked Falk.

"I pity him for allowing himself to be humbugged by adventurers, and I
shall never abandon his cause, for his cause is the burning question of
the near future, and all your politics aren't worth a penny in
comparison."

The two friends were making their way back to old Stockholm, and
finally entered a café.

It was between nine and ten and the room was almost empty. A single
customer was sitting near the counter. He was reading from a book to a
girl who sat beside him doing needlework. It was a pretty, domestic
scene, but it seemed to make a strong impression on Falk, who started
violently and changed colour.

"Sellén! You here? Good evening, Beda!" he said, with artificial
cordiality which sat strangely on him, shaking hands with the girl.

"Hallo! Falk, old chap!" said Sellén. "So you are in the habit of
coming here too? I might have guessed it, you are hardly ever at the
Red Room now."

Arvid and Beda exchanged glances. The young girl looked too
distinguished for her position; she had a delicate, intelligent face,
which betrayed a secret sorrow; and a slender figure. Her movements
were full of self-confidence and modesty; her eyes were set in her face
at a slightly upward angle; they seemed to be peering skyward as if
they were anticipating evil to drop down from the clouds; with this
exception they looked as if they were ready to play all the games which
the whim of the moment might dictate.

"How grave you are," she said to Arvid, and her gaze dropped to her
sewing.

"I've been to a grave meeting," said Arvid, blushing like a girl. "What
were you reading?"

"I was reading the Dedication from Faust," said Sellén, stretching out
his hand and playing with Beda's needlework.

A cloud darkened Arvid's face. The conversation became forced and
restrained. Olle sat plunged in meditations, the subject of which must
have been suicide.

Arvid asked for a paper and was given the _Incorruptible_. He
remembered that he had forgotten to look for the review of his poems.
He hastily opened the paper and on page three he found what he sought.

His eyes met neither compliments nor abuse; the article was dictated by
genuine and deep interest. The reviewer found Arvid's poetry neither
better nor worse than the average, but just as selfish and meaningless;
he said that it treated only of the poet's private affairs, of illicit
relations, real or fictitious; that it coquetted with little sins, but
did not mourn over great ones; that it was no better than the English
fashion-paper poetry, and he suggested that the author's portrait
should have preceded the title-page; then the poems would have been
illustrated.

These simple truths made a great impression on Arvid; he had only read
the advertisement in the _Grey Bonnet_, written by Struve, and the
review in the _Red Cap_, coloured by personal friendship. He rose with
a brief good-night.

"Are you going already?" asked Beda.

"Yes; are we going to meet to-morrow?"

"Yes, as usual. Good-night."

Sellén and Olle followed him.

"She's a rare child," said Sellén, after they had proceeded a little
way in silence.

"I should thank you to be a little more restrained in your criticism."

"I see. You're in love with her!"

"Yes. I hope you don't mind."

"Not in the least. I shan't get into your way!"

"And I beg you not to believe any evil of her...."

"Of course I won't! She's been on the stage...."

"How do you know? She never told me that!"

"No, but she told me; one can never trust these little devils too far."

"Oh well! there's no harm in that! I shall take her away from her
surroundings as soon as I possibly can. Our relations are limited to
meeting in the Haga Park at eight in the morning and drinking the water
from the well."

"How sweet and simple! Do you never take her out to supper?"

"I never thought of making such an improper suggestion; she would
refuse it with scorn. You are laughing! Laugh if you like! I still have
faith in a woman who loves whatever class she may belong to, and
whatever her past may have been. She told me that her life had not been
above reproach, but I have promised never to ask her about her past."

"Is it serious then?"

"Yes, it is serious."

"That's another thing; Good-night, Falk! Are you coming with me, Olle?"

"Good night."

"Poor Falk!" said Sellén to Olle. "Now it's his turn to go through the
mill. But there's no help for it; it's like changing one's teeth; a man
is not grown up until he has had his experience."

"What about the girl?" asked Olle, merely in order to show a polite
interest, for his thoughts were elsewhere.

"She's all right in her way, but Falk takes the matter seriously; she
does too, apparently, as long as she sees any prospect of winning him;
but unless Falk's quick about it, she will grow tired of waiting, and
who knows whether she won't amuse herself meanwhile with somebody else?
No, you don't understand these things; a man shouldn't hesitate in a
love-affair, but grab with both hands; otherwise somebody else will
step in and spoil the game. Have you ever been in love, Olle?"

"I had an affair with one of our servants at home; there were
consequences, and my father turned me out of the house. Since then I
haven't looked at a woman."

"That was nothing very complicated. But to be betrayed, as it is
called, that's what hurts, I can tell you! One must have nerves like
the strings of a violin to play that game. We shall see what sort of a
fight Falk will make; with some men it goes very deep, and that's a
pity.

"The door is open, come in Olle! I hope the beds are properly made, so
that you will lie softly; but you must excuse my old bed-maker, she
cannot shake up the feather-beds; her fingers are weak, don't you see,
and the pillow, I'm afraid, may be hard and lumpy."

They had climbed the stairs and were entering the studio.

"It smells damp, as if the servant had aired the room or scrubbed it."

"You are laughing at yourself! There can be no more scrubbing, you have
no longer a floor."

"Haven't I? Ah! That makes a difference! But what has become of it? Has
it been used for fuel? There's nothing for it then, but to lie down on
our mother earth, or rubbish, or whatever it may be."

They lay down in their clothes on the floor-packing, having made a kind
of bed for themselves of pieces of canvas and old newspapers, and
pushed cases filled with sketches underneath their heads. Olle struck a
match, produced a tallow candle from his trousers pocket and put it on
the floor beside him. A faint gleam flickered through the huge, bare
studio, passionately resisting the volumes of darkness which tried to
pour in through the colossal windows.

"It's cold to-night," said Olle, opening a greasy book.

"Cold! Oh no! There are only twenty degrees of frost outside, and
thirty in here because we are so high up. What's the time, I wonder?"

"I believe St. John's just struck one."

"St. John's? They have no clock! They are so poor that they had to pawn
it."

There was a long pause which was finally broken by Sellén.

"What are you reading, Olle?"

"Never mind!"

"Never mind? Hadn't you better be more civil, seeing that you are my
guest?"

"An old cookery book which I borrowed from Ygberg."

"The deuce you did! Do let's read it; I've only had a cup of coffee and
three glasses of water to-day."

"What would you like?" asked Olle, turning over the leaves. "Would you
like some fish? Do you know what a mayonnaise is?"

"Mayonnaise? No! Read it! It sounds good!"

"Well, listen! No. 139. Mayonnaise: Take some butter, flour, and a
pinch of English mustard, and make it into a smooth paste. Beat it up
with good stock, and when boiling add the yolks of a few eggs; beat
well and let it stand to cool."

"No, thank you; that's not filling enough...."

"Oh, but that's not all. Then take a few spoonfuls of fine salad oil,
vinegar, a spoonful of cream, some white pepper--oh, yes, I see now,
it's no good. Do you want something more substantial?"

"Try and find toad-in-the-hole. It's my favourite dish."

"I can't go on reading."

"Do!"

"No, leave me alone!"

They were silent. The candle went out and it was quite dark.

"Good-night, Olle; wrap yourself well up, or you'll be cold."

"What with?"

"I don't know. Aren't we having a jolly time?"

"I wonder why one doesn't kill oneself when one is so cold."

"Because it would be wrong. I find it quite interesting to live, if
only to see what will come of it all in the end."

"Are your parents alive, Sellén?"

"No; I'm illegitimate. Yours?"

"Yes; but it comes to the same thing."

"You should be more grateful to Providence, Olle; one should always be
grateful to Providence--I don't quite know why. But I suppose one
should."

Again there was silence. The next time it was Olle who broke it.

"Are you asleep?"

"No; I'm thinking of the statue of Gustavus Adolphus; would you believe
me when I...."

"Aren't you cold?"

"Cold? It's quite warm here."

"My right foot is frozen."

"Pull the paint box over you, and tuck the brushes round your sides,
then you'll be warmer."

"Do you think anybody in the world is as badly off as we are?"

"Badly off? Do you call us badly off when we have a roof over our
heads? Some of the professors at the Academy, men who wear
three-cornered hats and swords now, were much worse off than we are.
Professor Lundström slept during nearly the whole of April in the
theatre in the Hop garden. There was style in that! He had the whole of
the left stage-box, and he maintains that after one o'clock there
wasn't a single stall vacant; there was always a good house in the
winter and a bad one in the summer. Good night, I'm going to sleep
now."

Sellén snored. But Olle rose and paced the room, up and down, until the
dawn broke in the east; then day took pity on him and gave him the
peace which night had denied him.




CHAPTER XXV

CHECKMATE

The winter passed; slowly for the sufferers, more quickly for those who
were less unhappy. Spring came with its disappointed hopes of sun and
verdure, and in its turn made room for the summer which was but a short
introduction to the autumn.

On a May morning Arvid Falk, now a member of the permanent staff of the
_Workman's Flag_, was strolling along the quay, watching the vessels
loading and discharging their cargoes. He looked less well-groomed than
in days gone by; his black hair was longer than fashion decreed, and he
wore a beard à la Henri IV, which gave his thin face an almost savage
expression. An ominous fire burned in his eyes, a fire denoting the
fanatic or the drunkard.

He seemed to be endeavouring to make a choice among the vessels, but
was unable to come to a decision. After hesitating for a considerable
time, he accosted one of the sailors, who was wheeling a barrow full of
goods on to a brig. He courteously raised his hat.

"Can you tell me the destination of this ship?" he asked timidly,
imagining that he was speaking in a bold voice.

"Ship? I see no ship?"

The bystanders laughed.

"But if you want to know where this brig's bound for, go and read that
bill over there!"

Falk was disconcerted, but he forced himself to say, angrily:

"Can't you give a civil reply to a civil question?"

"Go to hell, and don't stand there swearing at a fellow!--'tention!"

The conversation broke off, and Falk made up his mind. He retraced his
footsteps, passed through a narrow street, crossed a market-place, and
turned the first corner. Before the door of a dirty-looking house he
stopped. Again he hesitated; he could never overcome his besetting sin
of indecision.

A small, ragged boy with a squint came running along, his hands full of
proofs in long strips; as he was going to pass Falk, the latter stopped
him.

"Is the editor upstairs?" he asked.

"Yes, he's been here since seven," replied the boy, breathlessly.

"Has he asked for me?"

"Yes, more than once."

"Is he in a bad temper?"

"He always is."

The boy shot upstairs like an arrow. Falk, following on his heels,
entered the editorial office. It was a hole with two windows looking on
a dark street; before each of the windows stood a plain deal table,
covered with paper, pens, newspapers, scissors and a gum bottle.

One of the tables was occupied by his old friend Ygberg, dressed in a
ragged black coat, engaged in reading proofs. At the other table, which
was Falk's, sat a man in shirt sleeves, his head covered by a black
silk cap of the kind affected by the communards. His face was covered
by a red beard, and his thick-set figure with its clumsy outlines
betrayed the man of the people.

As Falk entered, the communard's legs kicked the table violently: he
turned up his shirt-sleeves, displaying blue tattoo marks representing
an anchor and an Anglo-Saxon R, seized a pair of scissors, savagely
stabbed the front page of a morning paper, cut out a paragraph, and
said, rudely, with his back to Falk:

"Where have you been?"

"I've been ill," replied Falk, defiantly, as he thought, but humbly as
Ygberg told him afterwards.

"It's a lie! You've been drinking! I saw you at a café last night...."

"Surely I can go where I please."

"You can do what you like; but you've got to be here at the stroke of
the clock, according to our agreement. It's a quarter past eight. I am
well aware that gentlemen who have been to college, where they imagine
they learn a lot, have no idea of method and manners. Don't you call it
ill-bred to be late at your work? Aren't you behaving like a boor when
you compel your employer to do your work? What? It's the world turned
upside down! The employé treats the master--the employer, if you
like--as if he were a dog, and capital is oppressed."

"When did you come to these conclusions?"

"When? Just now, sir! just now! And I trust these conclusions are worth
considering, in spite of that. But I discovered something else; you are
an ignoramus; you can't spell! Look at this! What's written here? Read
it! 'We hope that all those who will have to go through their drill
next year....' Is it possible? '_Who ... next year...._'"

"Well, that's quite right," said Falk.

"Right? How dare you say it's right? It's customary to say _who in the
next year_, and consequently it should also be written in this form."

"That's right, too; definitions of time govern either the accusative
or...."

"None of your learned palaver! Don't talk nonsense to me! Besides this
you spell ex-ercise with an x only, although it should be spelt
_ex-sercise_. Don't make excuses--is it ex-ercise or ex-sercise?"

"Of course people say...."

"People say--therefore ex-sercise is right; the customary pronunciation
must be correct. Perhaps, all things considered, I'm a fool? Perhaps I
can't spell correctly? But enough, now! Get to work and another time
pay a little more attention to the clock."

He jumped up from his chair with a yell, and boxed the ears of the
printer's boy.

"Are you sleeping in bright daylight, you young scamp? I'll teach you
to keep awake. You are not yet too old for a thrashing."

He seized the victim by the braces, threw him on a pile of unsold
papers, and beat him with his belt.

"I wasn't asleep! I wasn't asleep! I was only closing my eyes a
little," howled the boy.

"What, you dare to deny it? You've learned to lie, but I will teach you
to speak the truth! Were you asleep or were you not asleep? Tell the
truth or you'll be sorry for it."

"I wasn't asleep," whimpered the boy, too young and inexperienced to
get over his difficulty by telling a lie.

"I see, you mean to stand by your lie, you hardened little devil! You
insolent liar!"

He was going to continue the thrashing when Falk rose, approached the
editor, and said firmly:

"Don't touch him! I saw that he was not asleep!"

"By jove! Listen to him! Who the dickens are you? Don't touch him! Who
said those words? I must have heard a gnat buzzing. Or perhaps my ears
deceived me. I hope so! I do hope so! Mr. Ygberg! You are a decent
fellow. You haven't been to college. Did you happen to see whether this
boy, whom I'm holding by the braces like a fish, was asleep or not?"

"If he wasn't asleep," replied Ygberg, phlegmatically and obligingly,
"he was just on the point of dropping off."

"Well answered! Would you mind holding him, Mr. Ygberg, while I give
him a lesson with my cane in telling the truth?"

"You've no right to beat him," said Falk. "If you dare to touch him, I
shall open the window and call for the police."

"I am master in my own house and I always thrash my apprentices. He is
an apprentice and will be employed in the editorial office later on.
That's what's going to be done, although there are people who imagine
that a paper can only be properly edited by a man who has been to
college. Speak up, Gustav, are you learning newspaper work? Answer, but
tell the truth, or...."

Before the boy had time to reply, the door was opened and a head looked
in--a very striking head, and certainly not one that might have been
expected in such a place; but it was a well-known head; it had been
painted five times.

At the sight of it the editor strapped his belt round him, hastily put
on his coat, bowed and smiled.

The visitor asked whether the editor was disengaged? He received a
satisfactory reply, and the last remnant of the working man disappeared
when a quick movement swept the communard's cap off the editor's head.

Both men went into an inner office and the door closed behind them.

"I wonder what the Count's after?" said Ygberg, with the air of a
schoolboy, when the master had left the class-room.

"I don't wonder in the least," said Falk; "I think I know the kind of
rascal he is, and the kind of rascal the editor is. But I am surprised
to find that you have changed from a mere blockhead into an infamous
wretch, and that you lend yourself to these disgraceful acts."

"Don't lose your temper, my dear fellow! You were not at the House last
night?"

"No! In my opinion Parliament is a farce, except in so far as private
interests are concerned. What about the 'Triton'?"

"The question was put to the vote, and it was resolved that the
Government, in view of the greatness, the patriotism, which
characterized the enterprise, should take over the debentures while
the society went into liquidation, that is to say, settled the current
affairs."

"Which means that Government will prop up the house while the
foundation crumbles away, so as to give the directors time to get out
of harm's way."

"You would rather that all those small...."

"I know what you are going to say, all those small capitalists. Yes, I
would rather see them working with their small capital than idling away
their time and lending it out at interest; but, above all things, I
should like to see those sharpers in prison; it would help to put a
stop to these swindles. But they call it political economy! It's vile!
There's something else I want to say: You covet my post. You shall have
it! I hate the idea of your sitting in your corner with a heart filled
with bitterness, because you have to sweep up after me in reading
proofs. There are already too many of my unprinted articles lying on
the desk of this contemptible apostle of liberty to tempt me to go on
telling cock-and-bull stories. The _Red Cap_ was too Conservative to
please me, but the _People's Flag_ is too dirty."

"I am glad to see you relinquishing your chimeras and listening to
common sense. Go to the _Grey Bonnet_, you'll have a chance there."

"I have lost the illusion that the cause of the oppressed lies in good
hands, and I think it would be a splendid mission to enlighten the
people on the value of public opinion--especially printed public
opinion--and its origin; but I shall never abandon the cause."

The door to the inner room opened again, and the editor came out. He
stood still in the middle of the office and said, in an unnaturally
conciliatory voice, almost politely:

"I want you to look after the office for a day, Mr. Falk. I have to go
away on important business. Mr. Ygberg will assist you so far as the
daily business is concerned. His Lordship will be using my room for a
few minutes. I hope, gentlemen, you will see that he has everything
he wants."

"Oh, please don't trouble," came the Count's voice from inside the
room, where he was sitting bent over a manuscript.

The editor went and, strange to say, two minutes later the Count went
also; he had waited just long enough to avoid being seen in the company
of the editor of the _Workman's Flag_.

"Are you sure that he's gone?" asked Ygberg.

"I hope so," said Falk.

"Then I'll go and have a look at the market. By-the-by, have you seen
Beda since?"

"Since when?"

"Since she left the café and went to live in a room by herself."

"How do you know she did?"

"Do control your temper, Falk. You'll never get on in the world unless
you do."

"Yes, you're right. I must take matters more calmly, or else I'll go
out of my mind! But that girl, whom I loved so dearly! How shamefully
she has treated me! To give to that clumsy boor all she denied to me!
And then to have the face to tell me that it proved the purity of her
love for me!"

"Most excellent dialectics! And she is quite right too, for her first
proposition is correct. She does love you, doesn't she?"

"She's running after me, anyhow."

"And you?"

"I hate her with all my soul, but I am afraid to meet her."

"Which proves that you are still in love with her."

"Let's change the subject!"

"You really must control yourself, Falk! Take an example from me! But
now I'll go and sun myself; one should enjoy life as much as possible
in this dreary world. Gustav, you can go and play buttons for an hour,
if you like."

Falk was left alone. The sun threw his rays over the steep roof
opposite and warmed the room; he opened the window and put out his head
for a breath of fresh air, but he only breathed the pungent odours of
the gutter. His glance swept the street on the right and far away in
the distance he saw a part of a steamer, a few waves of the Lake of
Mälar glittering in the sunlight, and a hollow in the rocks on the
other side, which were just beginning to show a little green here and
there. He thought of the people whom that steamer would take into the
country, who would bathe in those waves and feast their eyes on the
young green. But at this moment the whitesmith below him began to
hammer a sheet of iron, so that house and window panes trembled; two or
three labourers went by with a rattling, evil-smelling cart, and an
odour of brandy, beer, sawdust, and pine-branches poured out of the inn
opposite. He shut the window and sat down at his table.

Before him lay a heap of about a hundred provincial papers, from which
it was his task to make cuttings. He took off his cuffs and began to
look through them. They smelt of oil and soot and blackened his
hands--that was their principal feature. Nothing he considered worthy
of reprinting was of any use, for he had to consider the programme of
his paper. A report to the effect that the workmen of a certain factory
had given the foreman a silver snuff-box had to be cut out; but the
notice of a manufacturer having given five hundred crowns to his
working-men's funds had to be ignored. A paragraph reporting that the
Duke of Halland had handselled a pile-driver, and Director Holzheim
celebrated the event in verses, had to be cut out and reproduced in
full "because the people liked to read this kind of thing"; if he could
add a little biting sarcasm, all the better, for then "they were sure
to hear about it."

Roughly speaking, the rule was to cut out everything said in favour of
journalists and working men and everything depreciating clergymen,
officers, wholesale merchants (not retail), the professions, and
famous writers. Moreover, at least once a week, it was his business to
attack the management of the Royal Theatre, and severely criticize the
frivolous musical comedies produced in the Little Theatre, in the name
of morality and public decency--he had noticed that the working men did
not patronize these theatres. Once a month the town councillors had to
be accused of extravagance. As often as opportunity arose the form of
government, not Government itself, had to be assailed. The editor
severely censored all attacks on certain members of Parliament and
ministers. Which? That was a mystery unknown to even the editor; it
depended on a combination of circumstances which only the secret
proprietor of the paper could deal with.

Falk worked with his scissors until one of his hands was black. He had
frequent recourse to the gum-bottle, but the gum smelt sour and the
heat in the room was stifling. The poor aloe, capable of enduring
thirst like a camel, and patiently receiving countless stabs from an
irritated steel-nib, increased the terrible resemblance to a desert. It
had been stabbed until it was covered with black wounds; its leaves
shot, like a bundle of donkeys' ears out of the parched mould. Falk
probably had a vague consciousness of something of this sort, as he
sat, plunged in thought, for before he could realize what he was doing,
he had docked off all the ear lobes. When he perceived what he had
done, he painted the wounds with gum and watched it drying in the sun.

He vaguely wondered for a few moments how he was to get dinner, for he
had strayed on to that path which leads to destruction, so-called _poor
circumstances_. Finally he lit a pipe and watched the soothing smoke
rising and bathing, for a few seconds in the sunshine. It made him feel
more tolerant of poor Sweden, as she expressed herself in these daily,
weekly, and monthly reports, called the Press.

He put the scissors aside and threw the papers into a corner; he
shared the contents of the earthen water-bottle with the aloe; the
miserable object looked like a creature whose wings had been clipped; a
spirit standing in a bog on its head, digging for something; for
pearls, for instance, or at any rate, for empty shells.

Then despair, like a tanner, seized him again with a long hook, and
pushed him down into the vat, where he was to be prepared for the
knife, which should scrape his skin off and make him like everybody
else. And he felt no remorse, no regret at a wasted life, but only
despair at having to die in his youth, die the spiritual death, before
he had had an opportunity of being of use in the world; despair that he
was being cast into the fire as a useless reed.

The clock on the German church struck eleven, and the chimes began to
play "Oh blessed land" and "My life a wave"; as if seized by the same
idea, an Italian barrel-organ, with a flute accompaniment, began to
play "The Blue Danube." So much music put new life into the tinsmith
below, who began hammering his iron-sheet with redoubled energy.

The din and uproar prevented Falk from becoming aware of the opening of
the door and the entrance of two men. One of them had a tall, lean
figure, an aquiline nose and long hair; the other one was short, blond,
and thick set; his perspiring face much resembled the quadruped which
the Hebrews consider more unclean than any other. Their outward
appearance betrayed an occupation requiring neither much mental nor
great physical strength; it had a quality of vagueness, pointing to
irregularity of work and habits.

"Hsh!" whispered the tall man, "are you alone?"

Falk was partly pleased, partly annoyed at the sight of his visitors.

"Quite alone; the Red One's left town."

"Has he? Come along then and have some dinner."

Falk had no objection; he locked the office and went with his visitors
to the nearest public-house, where the three of them sat down in the
darkest corner.

"Here, have some brandy," said the thick-set man, whose glazed eyes
sparkled at the sight of the brandy bottle.

But Falk who had only joined his friends because he was yearning for
sympathy and comfort, paid no attention to the proffered delights.

"I haven't been as miserable as this for a long time," he said.

"Have some bread and butter and a herring," said the tall man. "We'll
have some caraway cheese. Here! Waiter!"

"Can't you advise me?" Falk began again. "I can't stand the Red One any
longer, and I must...."

"Here! Waiter! Bring some black bread! Drink, Falk, and don't talk
nonsense."

Falk was thrown out of the saddle; he made no second attempt to find
sympathy with his mental difficulties, but tried another, not unusual
way.

"Your advice is the brandy bottle?" he said. "Very well, with all my
soul, then!"

The alcohol flowed through his veins like poison, for he was not
accustomed to take strong drink in the morning; the smell of cooking,
the buzzing of the flies, the odour of the faded flowers, which stood
by the side of the dirty table-centre, induced in him a strange feeling
of well-being. And his low companions with their neglected linen, their
greasy coats, and their unwashed gaol-bird faces harmonized so well
with his own degraded position, that he felt a wild joy surging in his
heart.

"We were in the Deer Park last night and, by Jove! we did drink," said
the stout man, once more enjoying the past delights in memory.

Falk had no answer to this, and moreover, his thoughts were running in
a different groove.

"Isn't it jolly to have a morning off?" said the tall man, who seemed
to be playing the part of tempter.

"It is, indeed!" replied Falk, trying to measure his freedom, as it
were, with a glance through the window; but all he saw was a
fire-escape and a dust-bin in a yard which never received more than a
faint reflexion of the summer sky.

"Half a pint! That's it! Ah! Well and what do you say to the 'Triton'?
Hahaha!"

"Don't laugh," said Falk; "many a poor devil will suffer through it."

"Who are the poor devils? Poor capitalists? Are you sorry for those who
don't work, but live on the proceeds of their money? No, my boy, you
are still full of prejudices! There was a funny tale in the _Hornet_
about a wholesale merchant, who bequeathed to the crèche Bethlehem
twenty thousand crowns, and was given the order of Vasa for his
munificence; now it has transpired that the bequest was in 'Triton'
shares with joint liability, and so the crèche is of course bankrupt.
Isn't that lovely? The assets were twenty-five cradles and an oil
painting by an unknown master. It's too funny! The portrait was valued
at five crowns! Hahahaha!"

The subject of conversation irritated Falk, for he knew more of the
matter than the two others.

"Did you see that the _Red Cap_ unmasked that humbug Schönström who
published that volume of miserable verses at Christmas?" said the stout
man. "It really was a rare pleasure to learn the truth about the
rascal. I have more than once given him a sound slating in the
_Copper-Snake_."

"But you were rather unjust; his verses were not as bad as you said,"
remarked the tall man.

"Not as bad? They were worse than mine which the _Grey Bonnet_ tore to
shreds. Don't you remember?"

"By-the-by, Falk, have you been to the theatre in the Deer Park?" asked
the tall man.

"No!"

"What a pity! That Lundholm gang of thieves is playing there. Impudent
fellow, the director! He sent no seats to the _Copper-Snake_, and when
we arrived at the theatre last night, he turned us out. But he'll pay
for it! You give it to the dog! Here's paper and pencil. Heading:
'Theatre and Music. Deer Park Theatre.' Now, you go on!"

"But I haven't seen the company."

"What does that matter? Have you never written about anything you
hadn't seen?"

"No! I've unmasked humbugs, but I have never attacked unoffending
people, and I know nothing about this company."

"They are a miserable lot. Just scum," affirmed the stout man. "Sharpen
your pen and bruise his heel; you are splendid at it."

"Why don't you bruise him yourselves?"

"Because the printers know our handwriting and some of them walk on in
the crowds. Moreover Lundholm is a violent fellow; he will be sure to
invade the editorial office; then it will be a good thing to be able to
tell him that the criticism is a communication from the public. And
while you write up the stage, I will do the concerts. There was a
sacred concert last week. Wasn't the man's name Daubry? With a 'y'?"

"No, with an 'i,'" corrected the fat man. "Don't forget that he's a
tenor and sang the 'Stabat Mater.'"

"How do you spell it?"

"I'll tell you in a minute."

The stout editor of the _Copper-Snake_ took a packet of greasy
newspapers from the gas-meter.

"Here's the whole programme, and, I believe, a criticism as well."

Falk could not help laughing.

"How could a criticism appear simultaneously with the advertisement?"

"Why shouldn't it? But we shan't want it; I will criticize that French
mob myself. You'd better do the literature, Fatty!"

"Do the publishers send books to the _Copper-Snake_?" asked Falk.

"Are you mad?"

"Do you buy them yourselves for the sake of reviewing them?"

"Buy them? Greenhorn! Have another glass and cheer up, and I'll treat
you to a chop."

"Do you read the books which you review?"

"Who do you think has time for reading books? Isn't it enough to write
about them? It's quite sufficient to read the papers. Moreover, it's
our principle to slate everything."

"An absurd principle!"

"Not at all! It brings all the author's enemies and enviers on one's
side--and so one's in the majority. Those who are neutral would rather
see an author slated than praised. To the nobody there is something
edifying and comforting in the knowledge that the road to fame is beset
with thorns. Don't you think so?"

"You may be right. But the idea of playing with human destinies in this
way is terrible."

"Oh! It's good for young and old; I know that, for I was persistently
slated in my young days."

"But you mislead public opinion."

"The public does not want to have an opinion, it wants to satisfy its
passions. If I praise your enemy you writhe like a worm and tell me
that I have no judgment; if I praise your friend, you tell me that I
have. Take that last piece of the Dramatic Theatre, Fatty, which has
just been published in book form."

"Are you sure that it has been published?"

"I am certain of it. It's quite safe to say that there isn't enough
action in it; that's a phrase the public knows well; laugh a little at
the 'beautiful language'; that's good, old, disparaging praise; then
attack the management for having accepted such a play and point out
that the moral teaching is doubtful--a very safe thing to say about
most things. But as you haven't seen the performance, say that want of
room compels us to postpone our criticism of the acting. Do that, and
you can't make a mistake."

"Who is the unfortunate author?" asked Falk.

"Nobody knows."

"Think of his parents, his friends, who will read your possibly quite
unjust remarks."

"What's that got to do with the _Copper-Snake_? They were hoping to see
a friend slated; they know what to expect from the _Copper-Snake_."

"Have you no conscience?"

"Has the public which supports us, a conscience? Do you think we could
survive if it did not support us? Would you like to hear a paragraph
which I wrote on the present state of literature? I can assure you it
will give you plenty to think about. I have a copy with me. But let us
have some stout first. Waiter! Here! Now I'm going to give you a treat;
you can profit by it if you like."

"'We have not heard so much whining in the Swedish verse-factory for
many years; this constant puling is enough to drive a man into a
lunatic asylum. Robust rascals caterwaul like cats in March; they
imagine that anæmia and adenoids will arouse public interest now that
consumption is played out. And withal they have backs broad as brewers'
horses and faces red as tapsters. This one whimpers about the
infidelity of women, although all he has to go on is the bought loyalty
of a wanton; that one tells us that he has no gold, but that his "harp
is all he possesses in the world"--the liar! He has five thousand
crowns dividend per annum and the right to an endowed chair in the
Swedish Academy. A third is a faithless, cynical scoffer, who cannot
open his lips without breathing forth his impure spirit and babbling
blasphemies. Their verses are not a whit better than those which thirty
years ago clergymen's daughters sang to the guitar. They should write
for confectioners at a penny a line, and not waste the time of
publishers, printers, and reviewers with their rhymes. What do they
write about? About nothing at all, that is to say about themselves. It
is bad form to talk about oneself, but it is quite the right thing to
write about oneself. What are they bemoaning? Their incapacity to
achieve a success? Success? That is the word! Have they produced one
single thought, capable of benefiting their fellow-creatures; the age
in which they live? If they had but once championed the cause of the
helpless, their sins might be forgiven them; but they have not.
Therefore they are as sounding brass--nay, they are as a clanking piece
of tin and the cracked bell of a fool's cap--for they have no other
love than the love of the next edition of their books, the love of the
Academy and the love of themselves.'"

"That's sarcasm, isn't it? What?"

"It's unjust," said Falk.

"I find it very impressive," said the stout man. "You can't deny that
it is well written. Can you? He wields a pen which pierces
shoe-leather."

"Now, lads, stop talking and write; afterwards you shall have coffee
and liqueurs."

And they wrote of human merit and human unworthiness and broke hearts
as if they were breaking egg-shells.

Falk felt an indescribable longing for fresh air; he opened the window
which looked on the yard; it was dark and narrow like a tomb; all he
could see was a small square of the sky if he bent his head far back.
He fancied that he was sitting in his grave, breathing brandy fumes and
kitchen smells, eating the funeral repast at the burial of his youth,
his principles and his honour. He smelt the elder-blossoms which stood
on the table, but they reeked of decay; once more he looked out of the
window eager to find an object which would not inspire him with
loathing; but there was nothing but a newly tarred dust-bin--standing
like a coffin--with its contents of cast-off finery and broken litter.
His thoughts climbed up the fire-escape which seemed to lead from dirt,
stench, and shame right up into the blue sky; but no angels were
ascending and descending, and no love was watching from above--there
was nothing but the empty, blue void.

Falk took his pen and began to shade the letters of the headline
"Theatre," when a strong hand clutched his arm and a firm voice said:

"Come along, I want to speak to you!"

He looked up, taken back and ashamed. Borg stood beside him, apparently
determined not to let him go.

"May I introduce...." began Falk.

"No, you may not," interrupted Borg, "I don't want to know any drunken
scribblers, come along."

He drew Falk to the door.

"Where's your hat? Oh, here it is! Come along!"

They were in the street. Borg took his arm, led him to the nearest
square, marched him into a shop and bought him a pair of canvas shoes.
This done, he drew him across the lock to the harbour. A cutter lay
there, fast to her moorings, but ready to go to sea; in the cutter sat
young Levi reading a Latin grammar and munching a piece of bread and
butter.

"This," said Borg, "is the cutter _Urijah_; it's an ugly name, but she
is a good boat and she is insured in the 'Triton.' There sits her
owner, the Hebrew lad Isaac, reading a Latin grammar--the idiot wants
to go to college--and from this moment you are engaged as his tutor for
the summer--and now we'll be off for our summer residence at Nämdö. All
hands on board! No demur! Ready? Put off!"




CHAPTER XXVI

CORRESPONDENCE


CANDIDATE BORG _to_ JOURNALIST STRUVE

                                                  NÄMDÖ, _June_ 18--

OLD SCANDAL-MONGER!--As I am convinced that neither you nor Levin have
paid off your instalments of the loan made by the Shoemakers' Bank, I
am sending you herewith a promissory note, so that you may raise a new
loan from the Architects' Bank. If there is anything over after the
instalments have been paid up, we will divide it equally amongst us.
Please send me my share by steamer to Dalarö, where I will call for it.

I have now had Falk under treatment for a month, and I believe he is on
the road to recovery.

You will remember that after Olle's famous lecture he left us abruptly
and, instead of making use of his brother and his brother's connexions,
went on the staff of the _Workman's Flag_, where he was ill-treated for
fifty crowns a month. But the wind of freedom which blew there must
have had a demoralizing effect on him, for he became morose and
neglected his appearance. With the help of the girl Beda I kept my eye
on him, and when I considered him ripe for a rupture with the
communards, I went and fetched him away.

I found him in a low public-house called "The Star," in the company of
two scandal writers with whom he was drinking brandy--I believe they
were writing at the same time. He was in a melancholy condition, as you
would say.

As you know, I regard mankind with calm indifference; men are to me
geological preparations, minerals; some crystallize under one
condition, others under another; it all depends on certain laws or
circumstances which should leave us completely unmoved. I don't weep
over the lime-spar, because it is not as hard as a rock-crystal.

Therefore I cannot regard Falk's condition as melancholy; it was the
outcome of his temperament (heart you would say) plus the circumstances
which his temperament had created.

But he was certainly "down" when I found him. I took him on board our
cutter and he remained passive. But just as we had pushed off, he
turned round and saw Beda standing on the shore, beckoning to him; I
can't think how she got there. On seeing her, our man went clear out of
his mind. Put me ashore! he screamed, threatening to jump overboard. I
seized him by the arms, pushed him into the cabin and locked the door.

As we passed Vaxholm, I posted two letters; one to the editor of the
_Workman's Flag_, begging him to excuse Falk's absence, and the other
to his landlady, asking her to send him his clothes.

In the meantime he had calmed down, and when he beheld the sea and the
skerries, he became sentimental and talked a great deal of nonsense: he
had lost all hope of ever seeing God's (?) green earth again, he said,
and so on.

But presently he began to suffer from something like qualms of
conscience. He maintained that he had no right to be happy and take a
holiday when there were so many unhappy people in the world; he
imagined that he was neglecting his duty towards the scoundrel who
edits the _Workman's Flag_, and begged us to row him back. When I
talked to him of the terrible time he had just gone through, he replied
that it was the duty of all men to work and suffer for one another.
This view had almost become a religion with him, but I have cured him
of it with soda water and salt baths. He was completely broken, and I
had great difficulty in patching him up, for it was hard to say where
the physical trouble ended and the psychical began.

I must say that in a certain respect he excites my astonishment--I
won't say admiration, for I never admire anybody. He seems to suffer
from an extraordinary mania which makes him act in direct contradiction
to his own interest. He might have been in a splendid position, if he
had not thrown up his career in the Civil Service, particularly as his
brother would, in that case have helped him with a sum of money.
Instead of that he cast his reputation to the winds and slaved for a
brutal plebeian; and all for the sake of his ideals! It is most
extraordinary!

But he seems to be mending at last, more particularly after a lesson he
had here. Can you believe it, he called the fishermen "sir," and took
off his hat to them. In addition he indulged in cordial chats with the
natives, in order to find out "how these people lived." The result was
that the fishermen pricked up their ears, and one of them asked me one
day whether "this Falk" paid for his own board, or whether the doctor
(I) paid for him? I told Falk about it and it depressed him; he is
always despondent, whenever he is robbed of a delusion. A few days
later he talked to our landlord on the subject of universal suffrage;
later on our landlord asked me whether Falk was in poor circumstances.

During the first few days he ran up and down the shore like a madman.
Often he swam far out into the fjörd, as if he never meant to return
again. As I always looked upon suicide as the sacred right of every
individual, I did not interfere.

Isaac told me that Falk had opened his heart to him on the subject of
the girl Beda; she seems to have made an awful fool of him.

A propos of Isaac! He is one of the shrewdest fellows I ever met. He
has, after one month's study, mastered the Latin grammar, and he reads
his Cæsar as we read the _Grey Bonnet_; and what's more, he knows all
about it, which we never did. His brain is receptive, that is to say,
capable of assimilating knowledge, and in addition to this it is
practical; this combination has produced many a genius, in spite of
gross stupidity in many other respects. Every now and then he indulges
his business instincts; the other day he gave us a brilliant example of
his talent in that direction.

I know nothing about his financial position--for in that respect he is
very reticent--but a little while ago he had to pay a few hundred
crowns. He was very fidgety, and as he did not want to apply to his
brother (of the "Triton") with whom he is not on friendly terms, he
asked me to lend him the sum. I was not in a position to do so.
Thereupon he sat down, took a sheet of note-paper, wrote a letter and
sent it off by special messenger. For a few days nothing happened.

In front of our cottage grew a pretty little oakwood which shaded us
from the sun and sheltered us from the strong sea breezes. I don't know
much about trees and things pertaining to nature, but I love to sit in
the shade when the days are hot. One morning, on pulling up my blind, I
was dumbfounded; I was looking at the open fjörd and a yacht riding at
anchor about a cable-length from the shore. Every tree had gone, and
Isaac was sitting on a stump reading Euclid and counting the trunks as
they were being carried on board the yacht.

I wakened Falk; he was furious and had a quarrel with Isaac who made a
thousand crowns on the deal. Our landlord received two hundred, all he
had asked for. I could have killed Isaac, not because he had had the
trees cut down, but because I had not thought of it first.

Falk said it was unpatriotic, but Isaac swears that the removal of the
"rubbish" has improved the view; he declares that he will take a boat
next week and visit the neighbouring islets with the same object.

Our landlord's wife cried all day long, but her husband went to Dalarö
to buy her a new dress; he remained away for two whole days, and when
he returned at last, he was drunk; there was nothing in the boat, and
when his wife asked for the new dress, the fisherman confessed that he
had forgotten all about it.

Enough for the present. Write soon and tell me a few new scandals, and
be careful how you manipulate the loan.

                                  Your deadly enemy and security,
                                                               H. B.

P.S. I read in the papers that a Civil Service Bank is about to be
established. Who is going to put money into it? Keep an eye on it, so
that we can place a bill there when the time comes.

Please put the following paragraph into the _Grey Bonnet_; it will
affect my medical degree.

Scientific Discovery: Cand. Med. Henrik Borg, one of our younger
distinguished medical men has, while engaged in zootomic research on
the skerries near Stockholm, discovered a new species of the family
Clypeaster, to which he has given the very pertinent name of
_maritimus_. Its characteristics may be described as follows: Cutaneous
laminæ in five porous ambulacral shields and five interambulacral
shields, with warts instead of pricks. The animal has excited much
interest in the scientific world.

      *       *       *       *       *

ARVID FALK _to_ BEDA PETTERSON

                                                NÄMDÖ, _August_ 18--

As I walk along the seashore and see the roadweed growing in sand and
pebbles, I think of you blossoming for a whole winter in an inn of old
Stockholm.

I know nothing more delightful than to lie full length on a cliff and
feel the fragments of gneiss tickling my ribs while I gaze seaward. It
makes me feel proud, and I imagine that I am Prometheus, while the
vulture--that is you--has to lie in a feather bed in Sandberg Street
and swallow mercury.

Seaweed is of no use while it grows at the bottom of the sea; but when
it decays on the shore it smells of iodine which is a cure for love,
and bromide, which is a cure for insanity.

There was no hell until Paradise was quite complete, that is to say
until woman was created (chestnut!).

Far away, by the open sea, there lives a pair of eider ducks, in an old
quarter cask. If one considers that the stretched out wings of the
eider measure two feet, it seems a miracle--and love is a miracle. The
whole world is too small for me.

      *       *       *       *       *

BEDA PETTERSON _to_ MR. FALK

                                            STOCKHOLM, _August_ 18--

DEAR FRENT,--i have just receeved your letter, but i cannot say that i
have understood it, i see you think that i am in Sandberg Street, but
that is a grate lie and i can undertand why that blackgard says i am,
it is a grate lie and i sware that i love you as much as befor, i often
long to see you but it canot be yet.

                                                 Your fathfull Beda.

P. S. Dear Arvid, if you could lent me 30 crowns till the 15th, i sware
i will pay it back on the 15th becos i shall receeve money then, i have
been so ill and i am often so sad that i wish i was dead. The barmaid
in the café was a horrid creechur who was jelous becaus of the stout
Berglund and that is why i left. All they say of me is lies i hope you
are well and dont forget your

                              The same.

You can send the money to Hulda in the Café then i shall get it.

      *       *       *       *       *

CANDIDATE BORG _to_ JOURNALIST STRUVE

                                                NÄMDÖ, _August_ 18--

CONSERVATIVE BLACKGUARD,--You must have embezzled the money, for
instead of receiving cash, I received a request for payment from the
Shoemakers' Bank. Do you imagine a man has a right to steal because he
has a wife and children? Render an account at once, else I shall come
up to town and make a row.

I have read the paragraph, which, of course, was not without errors. It
said zoologic instead of zootomic, and Crypeaster instead of
Clypeaster. Nevertheless, I hope it will serve its purpose.

Falk went mad after receiving a letter in a feminine handwriting a day
or two ago. One minute he was climbing trees, at the next he was diving
to the bottom of the sea. I expect it was the crisis--I'll talk to him
like a father a little later on.

Isaac has sold his yacht without asking my permission, and for this
reason we are, at the moment, enemies. He is at present reading the
second book of Livy and founding a Fishing Company.

He has bought a strömming-net, a seal-gun, twenty-five pipe stems, a
salmon line, two bass-nets, a shed for drag-nets and a--church. The
latter seems incredible, but it is quite true. I admit it was scorched
a little by the Russians in 1719, but the walls are still standing. The
parish possesses a new one which serves the ordinary purpose; the old
one was used as a parochial store-room. Isaac is thinking of making the
Academy a present of it, in the hope of receiving the order of Vasa.

The latter has been given for less. Isaac's uncle, who is an innkeeper,
received it for treating the deaf and dumb to bread and butter and beer
when they used the riding-ground in the autumn. He did it for six
years. Then he received his reward. Now he takes no more notice of the
deaf and dumb, which proves how fatal the order of Vasa may be under
certain circumstances.

Unless I drown the rascal Isaac, he won't rest until he has bought all
Sweden.

Pull yourself together and behave like an honourable man, or I shall
bear down upon you like Jehu, and then you'll be lost.

                                                            H. B.

P.S. When you write the notice relating to the distinguished strangers
at Dalarö, mention me and Falk, but ignore Isaac; his presence
irritates me--he went and sold his yacht.

Send me some blank bills (blue ones, sola-bills) when you send the
money.

      *       *       *       *       *

CANDIDATE BORG _to_ JOURNALIST STRUVE

                                             NÄMDÖ, _September_ 18--

MAN OF HONOUR!--Money arrived! Seems to have been exchanged, for the
Architects' Bank always pays in Scanian bills of fifty. However, never
mind!

Falk is well; he has passed the crisis like a man; he has regained his
self-confidence--a most important quality as far as worldly success
goes, but a quality which, according to statistics is considerably
weakened in children who lose their mothers at an early age. I gave him
a prescription which he promised to try all the more readily as the
same idea had occurred to him. He will return to his former profession,
but without accepting his brother's help--his last act of folly of
which I do not approve--re-enter society, register his name with the
rest of the cattle, become respectable, make himself a social position,
and hold his tongue until his word bears weight.

The latter is absolutely necessary, if he is to remain alive; he has a
tendency to insanity, and is bound to lose his reason unless he forgets
all about these ideas which I really cannot understand; and I don't
believe that he himself could define what it is he wants.

He has begun the cure and I am amazed at his progress. I'm sure he'll
end as a member of the Royal Household.

That is what I believed until a few days ago when he read in a paper an
account of the Commune at Paris. He at once had a relapse and took to
climbing trees again. He got over it, though, and now he does not dare
to look at a paper. But he never says a word. Beware of the man when
his apprenticeship is over.

Isaac is now learning Greek. He considers the text-books too stupid and
too long; therefore he takes them to pieces, cuts out the most
important bits and pastes them into an account book which he has
arranged like a summary for his forthcoming examinations.

Unfortunately, his increasing knowledge of the classics makes him
impudent and disagreeable. So, for instance, he dared to contradict the
pastor the other day while playing a game of draughts with him, and
maintain that the Jews had invented Christianity and that all those
baptized were really Jews. Latin and Greek have ruined him! I am afraid
that I have nursed a dragon in my hairy bosom; if this is so, then the
seed of the woman must bruise the serpent's head.

                                                               H. B.

P.S. Falk has shaved his American beard and no longer raises his hat to
the fishermen.

You'll not hear from me again from Nämdö. We are returning to town on
Monday.




CHAPTER XXVII

RECOVERY


It was autumn again. On a clear November morning Arvid Falk was walking
from his elegantly furnished rooms in Great Street to ... man's
Boarding School near Charles XII Market, where he had an appointment as
master of the Swedish language and history.

During the autumn months he had made his way back into civilized
society, a proceeding which had brought home to him the fact that he
had become a perfect savage during his wanderings. He had discarded his
disreputable hat and bought a high one which he found difficult, at
first, to keep on his head; he had bought gloves, but in his savagery
he had replied "fifteen" when the shopgirl asked for his size, and
blushed when his reply brought a smile to the face of every girl in the
shop.

The fashion had changed, since he had last bought clothes; as he was
walking through the streets, he looked upon himself as a dandy, and
every now and then examined his reflexion in the shop windows, to see
whether his garments set well.

Now he was strolling up and down the pavement before the Dramatic
Theatre and waiting for the clock on St. James' Church to strike nine;
he felt uneasy and embarrassed, as if he were a schoolboy going to
school himself; the pavement was so short, and as again and again he
retraced his footsteps he compared himself to a dog on a chain.

For a moment he had a wild thought of taking a wider range, a very much
wider range, for if he went straight on, he would come to Lill-Jans,
and he remembered the spring morning when that very pavement had led
him away from society, which he detested, into liberty, nature,
and--slavery.

It struck nine. He stood in the corridor; the schoolroom doors were
closed; in the twilight he saw a long row of children's garments
hanging against the wall: hats, boas, bonnets, wraps, gloves, and muffs
were lying on tables and window sills, and whole regiments of button
boots and overshoes stood on the floor. But there was no smell of damp
clothes and wet leather as in the halls of the Parliamentary Buildings
and in the Working-men's Union "Phoenix," or--he became conscious of a
faint odour of newly mown hay--it seemed to come from a little muff
lined with blue silk and trimmed with tassels, which looked like a
white kitten with black dots. He could not resist taking it in his hand
and smelling the perfume--new-mown hay--when the front door opened and
a little girl of about ten came in accompanied by a maid.

She looked at the master with big fearless eyes, and dropped a
coquettish little curtsey; the almost embarrassed master replied with a
bow which made the little beauty smile--and the maid, too. She was
late; but she was quite unconcerned and allowed her maid to take off
her outdoor garments and overshoes as calmly as if she had come to a
dance.

From the class-room came a sound which made his heart beat--what was
it? Ah! The organ--the old organ! a legion of children's voices were
singing "Jesus, at the day's beginning...." He felt ill at ease, and
forced himself to fix his mind on Borg and Isaac in order to control
his feelings.

But matters went from bad to worse: "Our Father, which art in
Heaven...." The old prayer--it was long ago....

The silence was so profound that he could hear the raising of all the
little heads and the rustling of collars and pinafores; the doors were
thrown open; he looked at a huge, moving flower-bed composed of little
girls between eight and fourteen. He felt self-conscious like a thief
caught in the act, when the old headmistress shook hands with him; the
flowers waved to and fro, and there was much excited whispering and
exchanging of significant glances.

He sat down at the end of a long table, surrounded by twenty fresh
faces with sparkling eyes; twenty children who had never experienced
the bitterest of all sorrows, the humiliations of poverty; they met his
glance boldly and inquisitively, but he was embarrassed and had to pull
himself together with an effort; before long, however, he was on
friendly terms with Anna and Charlotte, Georgina and Lizzy and Harry;
teaching was a pleasure. He made allowances, and let Louis XIV and
Alexander be termed great men, like all others who had been successful;
he permitted the French Revolution to be called a terrible event,
during which the noble Louis XVI and the virtuous Marie Antoinette
perished miserably, and so on.

When he entered the office of the Board of Purveyance of Hay for the
Cavalry Regiments, he felt young and refreshed. He stayed till eleven
reading the _Conservative_; then he went to the offices of the
Committee on Brandy Distilleries, lunched, and wrote two letters, one
to Borg and one to Struve.

On the stroke of one he was in the Department for Death Duties. Here he
collated an assessment of property which brought him in a hundred
crowns; he had time enough before dinner to read the proofs of the
revised edition of the Forest Laws, which he was editing.

It struck three. Anybody crossing the Riddarhus Market at that time
could have met on the bridge a young, important-looking man, with
pockets bulging with manuscripts, and hands crossed on his back; he is
strolling slowly along, accompanied by an elderly, lean, grey-haired
man of fifty, the actuary of the dead. The estate of every citizen who
dies has to be declared to him; according to the amount he takes his
percentage; some say that this is his duty; others that he represents
the Earth, and has to watch that the dead take nothing away with them,
as everything is a loan--without interest. In any case, he is a man
more interested in the dead than the living, and therefore Falk likes
his company; he, on the other hand, is attached to Falk because, like
himself, he collects coins and autographs, and because he possesses
that excellent quality, tolerance, which is rarely found in a young
man.

The two friends enter the Restaurant Rosengren, where they are fairly
certain not to meet young men and where they can discuss numismatics
and autography. They take their coffee in the Café Rydberg and look at
catalogues of coins until six. At six o'clock the official _Post_
appears, and they read the promotions.

Each enjoys the other's company, for they never quarrel. Falk is so
free from fixed opinions that he is the most amiable man in the world,
liked and appreciated by chiefs and colleagues.

Occasionally they dine in the Hamburg Exchange and take a liqueur or
two at the Opera Restaurant, and to see them walking along arm in arm,
at eleven o'clock, is really quite an edifying sight.

Moreover, Falk has become a regular guest at family dinners and suppers
in houses into which Borg's father has introduced him. The women find
him interesting, although they do not know how to take him; he is
always smiling and expert at sarcastic little pleasantries.

But when he is sick of family life and the social life, he visits the
Red Room, and there he meets the redoubtable Borg, his admirer Isaac,
his secret enemy and envier Struve, the man who never has any money,
and the sarcastic Sellén, who is gradually preparing his second
success, after all his imitators have accustomed the public to his
manner.

Lundell, who, after the completion of his altar-piece, gave up painting
sacred pictures and became a fat Epicurean, only comes to the Red Room
when he has no money to pay for his dinner; he makes a living by
portrait painting, a profession which brings him countless invitations
to dinners and suppers; Lundell maintains that these invitations are
essential for making character studies.

Olle, who is still employed by the stonemason, has become a gloomy
misanthrope after his great failure as a politician and orator. He
refuses "to impose on" his former friends and lives a solitary life.

Falk is in a boisterous, riotous mood whenever he visits the Red Room,
and Borg is of opinion that he does him credit; he is a veritable
_sappeur_ to whom nothing is sacred--except politics; this is a subject
on which he never touches. But if, while he lets off his fireworks for
the amusement of his friends, he should catch, through the dense
tobacco smoke, a glimpse of the morose Olle on the other side of the
room, his mood changes, he becomes gloomy like a night on the sea, and
swallows large quantities of strong liquor, as if he wanted to
extinguish a smouldering fire.

But Olle has not been seen for a long time.




CHAPTER XXVIII

FROM BEYOND THE GRAVE


The snow was falling lightly and silently, clothing the street in pure
white, as Falk and Sellén were walking to the infirmary in the
south-eastern suburb of Kingsholm, to call for Borg on their way to the
Red Room.

"It's strange that the first snow should create an almost solemn
impression," said Sellén. "The dirty ground is transformed to...."

"Are you sentimental?" scoffed Falk.

"Oh, no! I was merely talking from the point of view of a landscape
painter."

They continued their way in silence, wading through the whirling snow.

"The Kingsholm with its infirmaries always strikes me as uncanny,"
remarked Falk, after a pause.

"Are you sentimental?" scoffed Sellén.

"Not at all, but this part of the town always makes that impression on
me."

"Nonsense! It doesn't make any impression at all; you imagine it does.
Here we are, and Borg's windows are lit up. Perhaps he's got some nice
corpses to-night."

They were standing before the door of the institute. The huge building
with its many dark windows glared at them as if it were inquiring what
they wanted at that hour of the night. They passed the round flower
bed, and entered the small building on the right.

At the very back of the room Borg was sitting alone in the lamplight,
working at the mutilated body of a man who had hanged himself.

"Good evening," said Borg, laying aside his knife. "Would you like to
see an old friend?"

He did not wait for the answer--which was not forthcoming--but lighted
a lantern, took his overcoat and a bunch of keys.

"I didn't know that we had any friends here," said Sellén, desperately
clinging to a flippant mood.

"Come along!" said Borg.

They crossed the yard and entered the large building; the creaking door
closed behind them, and the little piece of candle, a remnant from the
last card party, threw its red, feeble glimmer on the white walls. The
two strangers tried to read Borg's face, wondering whether he was up to
some trick, but the face was inscrutable.

They turned to the left and went along a passage which echoed to their
footsteps in a way which suggested that they were being followed. Falk
kept close behind Borg and tried to keep Sellén at his back.

"Over there!" said Borg, standing still in the middle of the passage.

Nobody could see anything but walls. But they heard a low trickling
sound, like the falling of a gentle rain and became aware of a strange
odour, resembling the smell of a damp flower-bed or a pine-wood in
October.

"To the right!" said Borg.

The right wall was made of glass, and behind it, on their backs, lay
three white bodies.

Borg selected a key, opened the glass door, and entered.

"Here!" he said, standing still before the second of the three.

It was Olle. He lay there as quietly, with his hands folded across his
chest, as if he were taking an afternoon nap. His drawn-up lips created
the impression that he was smiling. He was well-preserved.

"Drowned?" asked Sellén, who was the first to regain his
self-possession.

"Drowned," echoed Borg. "Can either of you identify his clothes?"

Three miserable suits were hanging against the wall. Sellén at once
picked out the right one; a blue jacket with sporting buttons, and a
pair of black trousers, rubbed white at the knees.

"Are you certain?"

"Ought to know my own coat--which I borrowed from Falk."

Sellén drew a pocket-book from the breast pocket of the jacket, it was
saturated with water and covered with green algæ, which Borg called
enteromorph. He opened it by the light of the lantern and examined its
contents--two or three overdue pawn-tickets and a bundle of papers tied
together, on which was written: To him who cares to read.

"Have you seen enough?" asked Borg. "Then let's go and have a drink."

The three mourners (friend was a word only used by Levin and Lundell
when they wanted to borrow money) went to the nearest public-house as
representatives of the Red Room.

Beside a blazing fire and behind a battery of bottles, Borg began the
perusal of the papers which Olle had left behind, but more than once he
had to have recourse to Falk's skill as an "autographer," for the water
had washed away the words here and there; it looked as if the writer's
tears had fallen on the sheets, as Sellén facetiously remarked.

"Stop talking now," said Borg, emptying his glass of grog with a
grimace which exhibited all his back teeth; "I am going to read, and I
beg of you not to interrupt me."

      *       *       *       *       *

"'TO HIM WHO CARES TO READ.

"'I have a right to take my life, all the more so because not only does
my act not interfere with the interests of a fellow-creature, but
rather it contributes to the happiness, as it is called, of at least
one person; a place and four hundred cubic feet of air will become
vacant.

"'My motive is not despair, for an intelligent individual never
despairs, but I take this step with a fairly calm conscience; that an
act of this kind throws one's mind into a certain state of excitement
will be easily understood by everybody; to postpone it from fear of
what might come hereafter is only worthy of a slave clutching at any
excuse, so that he might stay in a world where he cannot have suffered
much. At the thought of going, a burden seems to fall from my
shoulders; I cannot fare worse, I might fare better. If there is no
life beyond the grave, death must be happiness; as great a happiness at
least as sleep in a soft bed after hard physical labour. Nobody who has
ever observed how sleep relaxes every muscle, and how the soul
gradually steals away, can fear death.

"'Why does humanity make so much ado about death? Because it has
burrowed so deeply into the earth, that a tearing away from it is bound
to be painful. I put off from the shore long ago; I have no family
bonds, no social, national, or legal ties which could hold me back, and
I'm going simply because life has no longer any attraction for me.

"'I do not want to encourage those who are well content to follow my
example; they have no reason to do so, and therefore they cannot judge
my act. I have not considered the point whether it is cowardly or
not--to that aspect of the question I am indifferent; moreover, it is a
private matter; I never asked to come here and therefore I have a right
to go when I please.

"'My reason for going? There are so many reasons and they are so
complicated that I have neither the time nor the ability to explain
them. I will only mention the most obvious, those which had the
greatest influence on myself and on my act.

"'My childhood and youth were one long continuation of manual labour;
you who do not know what it means to labour from sunrise to sunset,
only to fall into a heavy sleep when the toil is over, you have escaped
the curse of the fall, for it is a curse to feel one's spiritual growth
arrested while one's body sinks deeper and deeper into the earth. A man
who walks behind the ploughing cattle day in day out, and sees nothing
but the grey clouds, will end by forgetting the blue sky above his
head; a man who takes a spade and digs a hole while the sun scorches
his skin, will feel that he is sinking into the parched ground and
digging a grave for his soul. You know nothing of this, you who play
all day long, and work a little only during an idle hour between
luncheon and dinner; you who rest your spirit when the earth is green
and enjoy nature as an ennobling and elevating spectacle. The toiler on
the land never sees the spirit of Nature. To him the field is bread,
the forest timber, the sea a wash-tub, the meadow cheese and
milk--everything is earth, soulless earth!

"'When I saw one-half of humanity engaged in fostering their spiritual
growth, while the other half had merely time to attend to their bodily
needs, I thought at first that there existed two laws for two different
species of man. But my intellect denied this. My spirit rebelled and I
resolved that I, too, would escape the curse of the fall--I became an
artist.

"'I can analyse the much-talked-of artistic instinct because I was
endowed with it myself. It rests on a broad base of longing for
freedom, freedom from profitable labour; for this reason a German
philosopher defined Beauty as the Unprofitable; as soon as a work of
art is of practical use, betrays a purpose or a tendency its beauty
vanishes. Further-more the instinct rests on pride; man wants to play
God in art, not that he wants to create anything new--he can't do
that--but because he wants to improve, to arrange, to recreate. He does
not begin by admiring his model, Nature, but by criticizing it.
Everything is full of faults and he longs to correct them.

"'This pride, spurring a man on to never-ceasing effort, and the
freedom from work--the curse of the fall--beget in the artist the
illusion that he is standing above his fellow creatures; to a certain
extent this is true, but unless he were constantly recalling this fact
he would find himself out, that is to say find the unreal in his
activity and the unjustifiable in his escape from the profitable. This
constant need of appreciation of his unprofitable work makes him vain,
restless, and often deeply unhappy; as soon as he comes to a clear
understanding of himself he becomes unproductive and goes under, for
only the religious mind can return to slavery after having once tasted
freedom.

"'To differentiate between genius and talent, to look upon genius as a
separate quality, is nonsense, and argues a faith in special
manifestation. The great artist is endowed with a certain amount of
ability to acquire some kind of technical skill. Without practice his
ability dies. Somebody has said: genius is the infinite capacity for
taking pains. This is, like so many other things, a half-truth. If
culture be added--a rare thing because knowledge makes all things
clear, and the cultured man therefore rarely becomes an artist--and a
sound intellect, the result is genius, the natural product of a
combination of favourable circumstances.

"'I soon lost faith in the sublime character of my hobby--heaven forbid
that I should call it my profession--for my art was incapable of
expressing a single idea; at the most it could represent the body in a
position expressing an emotion accompanying a thought--or, in other
words, express a thought at third hand. It is like signalling,
meaningless to all who cannot read the signals. I only see a red flag,
but the soldier sees the word of command: Advance! After all, even
Plato, who was a fine intellectualist and an idealist into the bargain,
realized the futility of art, calling it but the semblance of a
semblance (-reality); wherefore he excluded the artist from his ideal
state. He was in earnest!

"'I tried to find my way back into slavery, but I could not. I tried to
find in it my most sacred duty; I tried to resign myself, but I did not
succeed. My soul was taking harm, and I was on the way to becoming a
beast; there were times when I fancied that all this toil was a
positive sin, in as far as it checked the greater aim of spiritual
development; at such times I played truant for a day, and fled to
nature, absorbed in unspeakably blissful meditations. But then again
this bliss appeared to me in the light of a selfish pleasure as great,
greater even, than the pleasure I used to feel in my artistic work;
conscience, the sense of duty, overtook me like a fury and drove me
back to my yoke, which then seemed beautiful--for a day.

"'To escape from this unbearable state of mind, and win light and
peace, I go to face the Unknown. You who behold my dead body, say--do I
look unhappy in death?"

      *       *       *       *       *

"'NOTES MADE WHILE WALKING:

"'The plan of the world is the deliverance of the idea from the form;
art, on the other hand, attempts to imprison the idea in a sensuous
form, so as to make it visible. Therefore....

"'Everything corrects itself. When artistic traffic in Florence
surpassed all bounds Savonarola came--the profound thinker! and spoke
his "All this is futile." And the artists--and what artists they were!
made a pyre of their masterpieces--Oh! Savonarola!

"'What was the object of the iconoclasts in Constantinople? What did
the baptists and breakers of images want in the Netherlands? I dare not
state it for fear of being branded.

"'The great striving of our time: division of labour benefits the
species but sentences the individual to death. What is the species? The
conception of the whole; the philosophers call it the idea and the
individuals believe what they say and lay down their lives for the
idea!

"'It is a strange thing that the will of the princes and the will of
the people always clashes. Isn't there a very simple and easy remedy?

"'When, at a riper age, I again read through my school-books, I was
astonished to find that we human beings are so little removed from the
beasts in the fields. I reread Luther's Catechism in those days; I made
a few annotations, and drafted a plan for a new Catechism. (Not to be
sent in to the Commissioners; what I am going to say now is all that I
have written.)

"'The first Commandment destroys the doctrine of one God, for it
assumes other gods, an assumption granted by Christianity.

"'Note. Monotheism which is so highly extolled has had an adverse
influence on humanity; it has robbed it of the love and respect for the
One and True God, by leaving Evil unexplained.

"'The second and third Commandments are blasphemous; the author puts
petty and stupid commands in the mouth of the Lord; commands which are
an insult to His omniscience; if the author were living in our days, a
charge of blasphemy would be brought against him.

"'The fifth Commandment should read as follows: "Your inbred feeling of
respect for your parents shall not induce you to admire their faults;
you shall not honour them beyond their deserts; under no circumstances
do you owe your parents any gratitude; they have not done you a service
by bringing you into this world; selfishness and the civil code of laws
compel them to clothe and feed you. The parents who expect gratitude
from their children (there are some who even demand it) are like
usurers; they are willing to risk the capital as long as the interest
is being paid."'"

"'Note 1. The reason why parents (more especially fathers) hate their
children so much more frequently than they love them arises from the
fact that the presence of children has an adverse influence on the
financial position of the parents. There are parents who treat their
children as if they were shares in a joint stock company, from which
they expect constant dividends.

"'Note 2. This Commandment has resulted in the most terrible of all
forms of government, in the tyranny of the family, from which no
revolution can deliver us. There is more need for the foundation of
societies for the protection of children than for societies for the
protection of animals.

                   "'To be continued.

      *       *       *       *       *

"'Sweden is a colony which has passed her prime, the period when she
was a great power, and like Greece, Italy, and Spain, she is now
sinking into eternal sleep.

"'The terrible reaction which set in after 1865, the year of the death
of all hope, has had a demoralising effect on the new generation.
History has not witnessed for a long time a greater indifference to the
general welfare, a greater selfishness, a greater irreligiousness.

"'In the world outside the nations are bellowing with fury against
oppression; but in Sweden all we do is to celebrate jubilees.

"'Pietism is the sole sign of spiritual life of the sleeping nation; it
is the discontent which has thrown itself into the arms of resignation
to avoid despair and impotent fury.

"'Pietists and pessimists start from the same principle, the misery of
the world, and have the same aim: to die to the world and live to God.

"'The greatest sin man can commit is to be a Conservative from selfish
motives. It is an attempt against the plan of the world for the sake of
a few shillings; the Conservative tries to stem evolution; he plants
his back against the rolling earth and says: "Stand still!" There is
but one excuse: stupidity. Poor circumstances are no excuse, merely an
explanation.

"'I wonder whether Norway is not going to prove a new patch on an old
garment, as far as we are concerned?'"

      *       *       *       *       *

"Well, what do you think of it?" asked Borg laying down the papers and
drinking a small brandy.

"Not bad," said Sellén, "it might have been expressed more wittily."

"What do you think, Falk?"

"The usual cry--nothing more. Shall we go now?"

Borg looked at him, wondering whether he was speaking ironically, but
he saw no danger-signal in Falk's face.

"And so Olle has gone to happier hunting-grounds," said Sellén. "He's
well off, need no longer trouble about his dinner. I wonder what the
head-waiter at the 'Brass-Button' will say to it? Olle owed him a
little money."

"What heartlessness! What brutality! Shame on you!" burst out Falk,
throwing a few coins on the table, and putting on his overcoat.

"Are you sentimental?" scoffed Sellén.

"Yes, I am! Good night."

And he had gone.




CHAPTER XXIX

REVUE


LICENTIATE BORG at STOCKHOLM _to the_ LANDSCAPE PAINTER SELLÉN at PARIS

DEAR SELLÉN,--You have waited a whole year for a letter from me; now I
have news to tell you. If I were acting on my principles, I should
begin with myself; but as I had better conform to the rules of
politeness laid down by civilized society--seeing that I am about to go
out into the world to earn my own living--I will begin with you.

I heartily congratulate you on the success of your recently exhibited
picture. Isaac took the notice to the _Grey Bonnet_, and it was printed
without the knowledge of the editor, who was furious when he read it;
he had firmly made up his mind that you should be a failure. But now
that your genius has been acknowledged abroad, you are famous at home
too, and I need no longer be ashamed of you.

In order to forget nothing, and to be as brief as possible--for I am
lazy as well as tired after a day's work at the hospital--I will write
my letter in the shape of a report and the style of the GREY BONNET;
this will have the additional advantage that you can more easily skip
those parts which do not interest you.

The political situation is becoming more and more interesting; all
parties have corrupted one another by presents and counter-presents,
and now all of them are grey. This reaction will probably end in
Socialism. There is a talk of increasing the number of the districts to
forty-eight, and the Ministerial career is the one which offers the
best chances of promotion, more especially as a man need not even have
passed the examination of an elementary school-teacher. I met a
school-friend the other day who is already a pensioned Cabinet
Minister; he told me that it was far easier to become a Minister than a
secretary of one of the departments; they say the work is very much
like the work of a man who signs guarantees--it is only a matter of a
signature now and then! It doesn't matter so much about the payment,
there is always a second guarantor.

The Press--well, you know the Press. Roughly speaking it is just
business, that is to say, it always adopts the opinion of the majority,
and the majority, or, in other words, the greater number of
subscribers, is reactionary. One day I asked a Liberal journalist how
it was that he wrote in such laudatory terms about you, of whom he knew
nothing. He said it was because public opinion, i.e. the largest number
of subscribers, was on your side.

"But supposing public opinion turned against him?" I asked.

"Then, of course," he said, "I shall turn against him too."

You will understand that under these circumstances the whole generation
which grew up after 1865, and which is not represented in Parliament,
is in despair; and therefore they are either Nihilists--in other words,
they don't care a d---- for anything--or they find their advantage in
turning Conservative. To be a Liberal in these days is the devil's own
job.

The financial position is depressed. The supply of bills, mine at
least, reduced; no bank will look at the safest bills, even if they are
signed by two doctors.

The "Triton" went into liquidation, as you know. Directors and
liquidators took over the printed shares, but the shareholders and
depositors received a number of lithographed ones from the well-known
society at Norrköping, which alone managed to weather this period of
frauds and swindles. I met a widow who had a handful of papers
connected with a marble quarry; they were large, beautiful sheets,
printed in red and blue, on which 1000 Cr., 1000 Cr., was engraved; and
below the figures, just as if they were standing security, appeared the
names of well-known persons; three of them, at least, are knights of
the Order of the Seraphim.

Nicholas Falk, the friend and brother, sick of his private
money-lending business, because it detracted from the full value of his
civic authority, which is far from being the case when the business is
a public one, decided to combine with a few experts(?) and found a
bank. The novel feature of the undertaking was expressed as follows:

"As experience--truly a melancholy experience" (Levin is the author, as
you may guess) "has proved that deposit receipts are not in themselves
a sufficient guarantee for the return of deposits--that is deposited
money--we, the undersigned, actuated by unselfish zeal for the welfare
of home industry, and desirous of giving greater security to the
well-to-do public, have founded a bank, under the title of 'Deposit
Guarantee Society Limited.' The novel and safe feature of the
enterprise--and not everything new is safe--consists in the fact that
the depositors instead of receiving deposit receipts, are given
securities to the full value of the deposited sums, etc. etc."

They do a brisk business, and you may imagine what sort of securities
they issue instead of deposit receipts.

Levin. Falk, with his keen eye for business, recognized at once the
great advantage to be reaped from the services of a man with Levin's
experience and colossal knowledge of people, acquired through his
money-lending business. But to train him for all eventualities, and
make him familiar with all the by-ways of the business, he felled him
to the ground with his promissory note, and forced him into bankruptcy.
Having done so, he appeared in the rôle of his saviour and made him his
confidential clerk with the title of secretary. And now Levin is
installed in a little private office; but on no account is he permitted
to show his face in the bank.

Isaac Levi is employed in the same bank as cashier. He passed his
examinations (with Latin, Greek and Hebrew) first class in all
subjects. The _Grey Bonnet_, of course, reported his achievements. Now
he is reading for the law, and doing a little business on his own
account. He is like the eel; he has nine lives and lives on nothing. He
takes no alcohol; he does not smoke; I don't know whether he has any
vices, but he is formidable. He has an ironmongers shop at Hernösand, a
tobacconists at Helsingförs, and a fancy goods shop at Södertelje; in
addition he owns a few cottages at Stockholm, S. People say he is the
coming man; I say the man has come.

After the winding-up of the "Triton," his brother retired with a
considerable fortune, I am told, and is now doing business privately. I
heard that he proposed buying the forest monastery near Upsala, and
rebuilding it in a new style invented by his uncle of the Academy of
Arts. But his offer was refused. Levi, very much offended, sent a
notice to the _Grey Bonnet_ under the heading: "Persecution of the Jews
in the Nineteenth Century." It won him the lively sympathy of the whole
cultured public; the affair would win him a seat in Parliament if he
cared for that distinction. A vote of thanks was presented to him by
his co-religionists--(as if Levi had any religion) which was printed in
the _Grey Bonnet_. They thanked him for standing up for the rights of
the Jews (to buy the forest monastery). The address was handed to him
at a banquet, to which also a great many Swedes (I always refer the
Jewish question to its rightful domain, the ethnographical one) had
been bidden, to feast on bad salmon and uncorked wine. The deeply moved
hero of the day (vide _Grey Bonnet_) received on the same occasion a
present of 20,000 crowns (in shares) for the foundation of a Home for
Fallen Boys of the Evangelical Denomination.

I was present at the banquet, and saw a sight I had never seen
before--I saw Isaac the worse for drink! He shouted that he hated me,
and you, and Falk, and all "Whites"; he alternately called us "whites,"
and "natives," and _roche_; I had never heard the last word before, but
no sooner had he uttered it than a large number of "blacks" crowded
round us, looking so ominous that Isaac thought it better to take me
into an adjoining room. There he poured out all his soul to me; he
spoke of his sufferings as a schoolboy; of the ill-treatment to which
master and school-fellows had subjected him, the daily knocks and cuffs
from the street arabs. But what roused my indignation more than
anything else was an incident which had happened to him during his
military service; he was called up to the front at vespers and ordered
to recite the Lord's Prayer. As he did not know it, he was scoffed and
jeered at. His account made me change my opinion of him and his race.

Religious swindle and charitable fraud are more rampant than ever, and
make life in our country very unpleasant. You will remember two imps of
Satan, Mrs. Falk and Mrs. Homan, the two pettiest, vainest and most
malicious creatures who ever idled away their days. You know the crèche
they had founded and its end. Their latest achievement is a Home for
Fallen Women, and the first inmate--received on my recommendation--was
Marie! The poor girl had lent all her savings to a fellow who absconded
with them. She was only too happy to find a home where she would be
kept free of charge, and be able to retrieve her character. She told me
that she did not mind all the religious palaver, which is,
unfortunately, inseparable from an enterprise of this sort, as long as
she could count on her cup of coffee in the morning.

The Rev. Skore, whom you will no doubt remember, has not been made
_pastor primarius_, and from sheer annoyance he is begging for funds to
build a new church. Printed begging-letters, signed by all the
wealthiest magnates of Sweden, are sent out to appeal to the charitable
public. The church, which is to be three times the size of the church
on the Blasieholm and connected with a sky-high tower, is to be built
on the old site of St. Catherine's. The latter is supposed to be too
small to satisfy the great spiritual needs from which the Swedish
nation is suffering at the moment, and is, therefore, to be pulled
down. The sum collected has already reached such dimensions that a
treasurer had to be appointed (with free lodging and fuel). Who do you
think is the treasurer? You would never guess! Struve!

Struve has become somewhat religious these days--I say _somewhat_,
because it is not much--only just enough for his position, for he is
patronized by the faithful. This does, however, not interfere with his
journalism and his drinking. But his heart is not soft, on the
contrary, he is most bitter against all those who have not come down;
between you and me, he has very much deteriorated; therefore he hates
you and Falk, and he has sworn to slate you next time you are heard of.
He had to submit to the marriage ceremony for the sake of the free
lodging and fuel. He was married to his wife in the White Mountains. I
was one of the witnesses. His wife, too, has been converted, for she is
under the impression that religion is good form.

Lundell has left the religious sphere, and is painting nothing but
portraits of directors; he has been made assistant at the Academy of
Arts. He has also become immortal, for he has managed to smuggle a
painting of his into the National Museum. It was accomplished by a very
simple trick and ought to encourage imitators. Smith made a present to
the National Museum of one of Lundell's genre pictures, a service which
Lundell repaid by painting his portrait gratis! Splendid! Isn't it?

The end of a romance. One Sunday morning, at the hour when the Sabbath
peace is not disturbed by the terrible church bells, I was sitting in
my room, smoking. There was a knock at the door, and a tall, well-made
man, whose face seemed familiar to me, entered--it was Rehnhjelm. We
cross-examined each other. He is manager of a large factory and quite
satisfied with his lot.

Presently there was another knock. It was Falk. (More of him later on.)

We revived old memories and discussed mutual friends. But by and by
there was a pause, that strange silence which so frequently occurs
after a lively conversation. Rehnhjelm took up a book, turned over the
leaves and read out:

"A Cæsarean Operation: An academic treatise which, with the permission
of the illustrious medical faculty, will be publicly discussed in the
little lecture room of the University." What horrible diagrams! "Who in
the world is the unfortunate being cursed thus to haunt the living
after his death?"

"You will find it on page 2," I said.

He went on reading.

"The pelvis which, as No. 38, is preserved in the pathological
collection of the Academy...." No--that can't be it. "Agnes Rundgren,
spinster...."

The man's face turned as white as chalk. He got up and drank some
water.

"Did you know the woman?" I asked, in order to distract his thoughts.

"Did I know her? She was on the stage, and I knew her at X-köping;
after leaving X-köping, she was engaged in a Stockholm café, under the
name of Beda Petterson."

Then you should have seen Falk! It came to a scene which ended in
Rehnhjelm's cursing all women, and Falk, greatly excited, replying,
that there were two kinds of women, which differed from each other as
much as angels and devils. He was so moved that Rehnhjelm's eyes filled
with tears.

And now to Falk! I purposely left him to the last. He is engaged to be
married! How did it happen? He himself says: "We just met one
another!"

As you know, I have no rigid opinions, but cultivate an open mind; but
from what I have seen up to now, it is undeniable that love is
something of which we bachelors know nothing--what we call love is
nothing but frivolity. You may laugh if you like, you old scoffer!

Only in very bad plays have I seen such a rapid development of
character, as I had occasion to watch in Falk. You won't be surprised
to hear that his engagement was not all plain sailing. The girl's
father, an old widower, a selfish army pensioner, looked upon his
daughter as an investment, hoping that she would marry well and thereby
secure him a comfortable old age. (Nothing at all unusual!) He
therefore bluntly refused his consent. You should have seen Falk! He
called on the old man again and again; he was kicked out, and yet he
called again and told the old egoist to the face that he would marry
his daughter without his consent, if he continued to object. I am not
sure, but I believe it actually came to fisticuffs.

One evening Falk had accompanied his sweetheart home. They had both
spent the evening at the house of one of the girl's relatives to whom
Falk had introduced himself. When they turned the corner of the street
in which the girl lives, they saw by the light of the street lamp that
her father was leaning out of the window--he lives in a small house
which belongs to him. Falk knocked at the garden gate; but nobody came
to open it. At last he climbed over and was on the other side attacked
by a large dog; he got the better of the brute and shut it up in the
dust-bin. (Imagine the nervous Falk.) Then he compelled the porter to
get up and open the gate. Now they had gained the yard and stood before
the front door. He hammered it with a large stone, but no reply came
from within; he searched the garden and found a ladder, by means of
which he reached the old man's window. Open the door, he shouted, or
I'll smash the window!

"If you smash the window, you rascal," yelled the old man, "I'll shoot
you!"

Falk immediately smashed the window.

For a few moments there was silence. Finally a voice came from within
the fortress:

"You are my man! I consent."

"I'm not fond of smashing windows," explained Falk, "but there's
nothing I would not do to win your daughter."

The matter was settled, and they became engaged.

I don't know whether you know that Parliament has carried through its
reorganization of the public offices, doubling the salaries and the
number of posts, so that a young man in the first division is now in a
position to marry. Falk is going to be married in the autumn.

His wife will keep her post at the school. I know next to nothing of
the Woman's Question--it doesn't interest me--but I believe that our
generation will get rid of the last remnant of the Eastern conception
which still clings to marriage. In the days to come, husband and wife
will enter into a partnership where both will retain their
independence; they will not try to convert each other, but will
mutually respect their weaknesses, and live together in a life-long
friendship which will never be strained by the demands of one of the
partners for amorous demonstrations.

I look upon Mrs. Nicholas Falk, the charitable she-devil, as nothing
more than a _femme entretenue_, and I am sure she does so herself. Most
women marry for a home where they need not work--be their own mistress,
as it is called. The fact that marriage is on the decline is as much
the woman's fault as the man's.

But I cannot make Falk out. He is studying numismatics with an almost
unnatural zeal; he told me the other day that he was engaged in writing
a text-book on numismatics, which he would endeavour to introduce into
the schools where this science is to be taught.

He never reads a paper; he does not know what is going on in the world,
and he seems to have abandoned the idea of writing. He lives only for
his work and his fiancée, whom he worships.

But I don't trust his calm. Falk is a political fanatic, well aware
that he would be consumed if he allowed the fire to burn freely;
therefore he tries to stifle it with hard, monotonous work; but I don't
think that he will succeed; in spite of all his restraint the day is
bound to come when he will cast aside all self-control and burst out
into fresh flames.

Between you and me--I believe he belongs to one of those secret
societies which are responsible for the reaction and militarism on the
Continent. Not very long ago, at the reading of the King's Speech in
Parliament, I saw him, dressed in a purple cloak, with a feather in his
hat, sitting at the foot of the throne (at the foot of the throne!) and
I thought--no, it would be a sin to say what I thought. But when the
Prime Minister read his Majesty's gracious propositions respecting the
state of the country and its needs, I saw a look in Falk's eyes which
plainly said: What on earth does his Majesty know of the condition and
needs of the country?

That man, oh! that man!

I conclude my review without having forgotten anybody. Enough for
to-day. You shall soon hear from me again.

                                                         H. B. 1879.




CHAPTER XXX

EPILOGUE


Doubtless there is not another street in Stockholm as ugly, and not
another house as old, as dirty, and as gloomy. The entrance gate has
the inviting appearance of a disused gallows. The rubble stones in the
yard have moved more closely together in the course of time, so that a
few small blades of grass have been able to shoot up. The house stands
by itself, like an old hermit who has sought a solitary spot in which
to collapse. There has once been an Assaying Office in the yard, and
the outside walls are blackened with smoke. The chinks between the
window frames and the walls are grown over, and the house looks as if
it had not washed its face or eyes for a generation. The foundation has
settled, and the building is stooping to the left. The leaking gutter
has been weeping tears which have drawn black furrows all over the
front of the building; the plastering is crumbling off here and there,
and on windy nights one can hear it rattling down the walls into the
street below. The house looks like an old dowager house of poverty,
recklessness, carelessness, and vice.

And yet there are two people who cannot pass through the street without
stopping to look at the miserable, frowning old building with emotion
almost amounting to love. To them the entrance gate is a triumphal
arch, the weeds and the gutter a green meadow, and a murmuring brook,
the black house a charming ruin, containing lovely, rose-red memories.
It is more, even, for whenever they pass it, the air vibrates with
music, perfumes rise from the earth, and they see the sun shining even
on the cloudiest autumn day; there have been times when they forgot
themselves so far as to kiss each other; but they have always been a
little mad, these good people.

Three years ago our young friend--we may call him friend since he
repented of his youthful errors, apologised to society, and became a
respectable individual, serving the country and wearing purple in the
House of Parliament--our young friend, I say, was busy on the third
floor of the ugly old house with a sheet of pins between his lips, a
hammer in his coat-pocket, and a pair of pincers under his arm; he was
standing on a ladder, putting up curtains in a small room, furnished
only with a tiny sofa, a tiny dressing-table, a small desk, and a very
small bed with white curtains.

In the dining-room the faithful Isaac, in shirt-sleeves, was engaged in
spreading paste on a piece of wallpaper, stretched on an ironing-board
which rested on two chairs; he was whistling and singing one unknown
song after the other to quite unheard-of tunes. When he was tired of
working, he prepared luncheon on an empty box standing before the
window.

Outside the sun was shining into the neighbour's garden. It was a tiny
garden squeezed between the walls of the houses; it had a pear tree in
full bloom, and two elder bushes covered with blossoms; between the
gables a piece of blue sky was visible and the mast heads of the timber
barges in the harbour.

Isaac had been to the dairy; had bought sandwiches and porter; had
papered the future mistress's room; had purchased oleanders and ivy, so
that the landing windows with their black frames should not shock the
young wife as she entered her new home; he would have liked to paint
them, but he was afraid that she might object to the smell.

A cab stopped before the front door.

"It's Borg," said Isaac. "What the dickens does he want here? And that
pest, Levin, is with him!"

It was a long visit, lasting ten minutes, and a disagreeable one; but
Falk bore it patiently, like any other trial; he had for ever broken
with the past; in one respect at least; in another he was bound, for he
had been compelled during the ten minutes to sign once more.

The next visitors were the sister-in-law, Mrs. Falk, and Mrs. Homan.
They found the paper in the dining-room too dark, and the paper in the
young wife's room too light. They thought the curtains in the husband's
room were not wide enough, the carpet a bad match to the furniture, the
clock old-fashioned, and the chandelier too dear for its plainness. One
piece of furniture in the young wife's room especially roused their
critical faculty, and gave rise to a long, whispered conversation. They
called the kitchen black, the landing dirty, the entrance terrible; but
otherwise they said everything was quite nice, much nicer than the
yard, where there was not even a porter, led one to expect.

This was the second plague, and it passed like everything else in this
world.

But Isaac had lost some of his gaiety after the criticism of his
wallpapers, and Falk realized for a moment that it was a miserable
hole. He opened the windows to let out the evil spirits which had
invaded his pleasure garden. Isaac declared that during the wedding
days he would have the two women shut up in the debtors' prison, so as
to keep them safely away.

And then--then she came. He was standing at the window, and he saw her
when she was still too far off to be seen; he expected to be believed
when he maintained that she radiated light and that the street through
which she was walking was bathed in sunshine. Of course he could have
told endless stories of her kindness, sweetness, and beauty; but not
even she believed them, and it is not worth while repeating them.

She entered her future home and found everything charming. Isaac went
into the kitchen to split some wood and light the kitchen fire. Nobody
missed him until he returned with a tray bearing some cups of
chocolate. It amused him; he knew that lovers never miss anybody in the
wide world, and he found the terrible selfishness, which is called
love, a very amiable quality; moreover, everybody admits that it is
justified.

"What people said about it?" They said:

"Well, and so Falk is married?"

"Is he? Whom did he marry?"

"A schoolmistress!"

"Ugh! A woman with blue spectacles and short hair!"

And the questioner had all the information he wanted.

If the answer had been: "He's married old Kochstrom's daughter," the
second question would have been: "Did he get any money with her?"

The world asks no further questions, and everything would be all
right--if this were all. But the world demands that a couple which has
three times given the clergyman the trouble to read the banns and the
community to listen to them; which has forced its fellow-creatures to
engage in genealogical research and send a reporter to the wedding--the
world demands that such a couple shall be happy--woe to it if it is
not!

Supposing that on coming home from school, tired with her work, angry
at a slight, depressed because some of her efforts have proved a
failure, she should meet a friend in the street who takes her hand and
says: "You don't look too happy, Elizabeth," then woe to him!

Supposing that on leaving his office, in despair because he has been
overlooked instead of promoted, he should meet a friend who finds him
looking depressed, then woe to her!

Unhappy people, if you dare to be anything but happy!

      *       *       *       *       *

It was a winter evening two or three years later; she was bending over
her writing desk, correcting copybooks, he was sitting in his room
computing assessments of property. The pens were scribbling, the clock
was ticking, and the tea-kettle singing. Whenever he looked up from his
documents at her sweet face, she raised her eyes, their glances met,
and they nodded to each other as if they had been parted for a long
time. And they continued working.

But finally he grew tired of his work.

"Talk to me a little," he pleaded.

And she eagerly complied with his request.

"But what do they talk about?"

The scoffer Borg once asked that question, when he declared matrimony
to be an impossibility from the point of view of natural science.

He laid down the proposition that the moment must come when every
subject had been discussed, when each partner knew every thought and
opinion of the other, and when absolute silence was bound to reign.

The fool!

                   THE END


THE HAND OF THE INVISIBLE


With a feeling of wild joy I returned from the northern railway
station, where I had said good-bye to my wife. She was going to our
child, who was ill in a distant place. The sacrifice of my heart
was then fulfilled. Her last words, "When shall we meet again?" and
my answer, "Soon!" echoed in my ears, like falsehoods which one is
unwilling to confess. A foreboding said to me "Never!" And, as a matter
of fact, these parting words which we exchanged in November, 1894, were
our last, for to this present time, May, 1897, I have not seen my dear
wife again.

As I entered the Café de la Régence, I placed myself at the table where
I used to sit with my wife, my beautiful jail-keeper, who watched my
soul day and night, guessed my secret thoughts, marked the course of my
ideas, and was jealous of my investigations into the unknown.

My newly-won freedom gave me a feeling of expansion and elevation
above the petty cares of life in the great capital. In this arena of
intellectual warfare I had just gained a victory, which, although
worthless in itself, signified a great deal to me. It was the
fulfilment of a youthful dream which all my countrymen had dreamed,
but which had been realised by me alone, to have a play of one's
own performed in a Paris theatre. _Now_ the theatre repelled me, as
everything does when one has reached it, and science attracted me.
Obliged to choose between love and knowledge, I had decided to strive
for the highest knowledge; and as I myself sacrificed my love, I forgot
the other innocent sacrifice to my ambition or my mission.

As soon as I returned to my poor student's room in the Latin Quarter, I
rummaged in my chest and drew out of their hiding-place six saucepans
of fine porcelain. I had bought them a long time ago, although
they were too dear for my means. A pair of tongs and a packet of
pure sulphur completed the apparatus of my laboratory. I kindled a
smelting-furnace in the fireplace, closed the door, and drew down the
blinds, for only three months after the execution of Caserio it was
not prudent to make chemical experiments in Paris.

The night comes on, the sulphur burns luridly, and towards morning
I have ascertained the presence of carbon in what has been before
considered an elementary substance. With this I believe I have solved
the great problem, upset the ruling chemical theories, and won the
immortality grudged to mortals.

But the skin of my hands, nearly roasted by the strong fire, peels
off: in scales, and the pain they cause me when undressing shows me
what a price I have paid for my victory. But, as the alone in bed,
I feel happy, and I am sorry I have no one whom I can thank for my
deliverance from the marital fetters which have been broken without
much ado. For in the course of years I have become an atheist, since
the unknown powers have left the world to itself without giving a sign
of themselves.

Someone to thank! There is no one there, and my involuntary ingratitude
depresses me.

Feeling jealous about my discovery, I take no steps to make it known.
In my modesty I turn neither to authorities nor to universities. While
I continue my experiments, the cracked skin of my hands becomes worse,
the fissures gape and become full of coal-dust; blood oozes out, and
the pains become so intolerable that I can undertake nothing more. I am
inclined to attribute these pains which drive me wild to the unknown
powers which have persecuted me for years, and frustrate my endeavours.
I avoid people, neglect society, refuse invitations, and make myself
inaccessible to friends. I am surrounded by silence and loneliness. It
is the solemn and terrible silence of the desert in which I defiantly
challenge the unknown, in order to wrestle with him, body with body,
and soul with soul. I have proved that sulphur contains carbon; now I
intend to discover hydrogen and oxygen in it, for they must be also
present. But my apparatus is insufficient, I need money, my hands are
black and bleeding, black as misery, bleeding as my heart. For, during
this time, I continue to correspond with my wife. I tell her of my
successes in chemical experiments; she answers with news about the
illness of our child, and here and there drops hints that my science is
futile, and that it is foolish to waste money on it.

In a fit of righteous pride, in the passionate desire to do myself an
injury, I commit moral suicide by repudiating my wife and child in
an unworthy, unpardonable letter. I give her to understand that I am
involved in a new love-affair.

The blow goes home. My wife answers with a demand for separation.

Solitary, guilty of suicide and assassination, I forget my crime under
the weight of sorrow and care. No one visits me, and I can see no one,
since I have alienated all. I drift alone over the surface of the sea;
I have hoisted my anchor, but have no sail.

Necessity, however, in the shape of an unpaid bill, interrupts my
scientific tasks and metaphysical speculations, and calls me back to
earth.

Christmas approaches. I have abruptly refused the invitation of a
Scandinavian family, the atmosphere of which makes me uncomfortable
because of their moral irregularities. But, when evening comes and I am
alone, I repent, and go there all the same.

They sit down to table, and the evening meal begins with a great
deal of noise and outbursts of hilarity, for the young artists who
are present feel themselves at home here. A certain familiarity of
gestures and attitudes, a tone which is anything but domestic, repels
and depresses me indescribably. In the middle of the orgy my sadness
calls up to my inner vision a picture of the peaceful home of my wife:
the Christmas tree, the mistletoe, my little daughter, her deserted
mother. Pangs of conscience seize me; I stand up, plead ill-health as
an excuse, and depart.

I go down the dreadful Rue de la Gaieté in which the artificial mirth
of the crowd annoys me; then down the gloomy silent Rue Delambre, which
is more conducive to despair than any other street of the Quarter. I
turn into the Boulevard Montparnasse, and let myself fall on a seat on
the terrace of the Lilas brewery.

A glass of good absinthe comforts me for some minutes. Then there fall
on me a set of cocottes and students who strike me on the face with
switches. As though driven by furies, I leave my glass of absinthe
standing, and hasten to seek for another in the Café François Premier
on the Boulevard St. Michel. Out of the frying-pan into the fire! A
second troop shouts at me, "There is the hermit!" Driven forth again I
fly home, accompanied by the unnerving tones of the mirliton pipes.

The thought that it might be a chastisement, the result of a crime,
does not occur to me. In my own mind I feel guiltless, and consider
myself the object of an unjust persecution. The unknown powers have
hindered me from continuing my great work. The hindrances must be
broken through before I obtain the victor's crown.

I have been wrong, and at the same time I am right, and will maintain
it.

That Christmas night I slept badly. A cold draught several times blew
on my face, and from time to time the sound of a jew's-harp awoke me.

       *       *       *       *       *

An increasing prostration comes over me. My black and bleeding hands
prevent my dressing myself and taking care of my outer appearance.
Anxiety about my unpaid hotel bill leaves me no peace, and I pace up
and down my room like a wild beast in a cage. I eat no longer, and the
hotel manager advises me to go to a hospital. But that is no help to
me, for it is too dear, and I must pay my bill here first.

The veins in my arm begin to swell visibly; it is a sign of
blood-poisoning. This is the finishing stroke. The news spreads among
my countrymen, and one evening there comes the kind-hearted woman,
whose Christmas dinner I had so abruptly left, who was antipathetic to
me, and whom I almost despised. She finds me out, asks how I am, and
tells me with tears that the hospital is my only hope.

One can understand how helpless and humiliated I feel, as my eloquent
silence shows her that I am penniless. She is seized with sympathy
at seeing me so prostrate. Poor herself, and oppressed with daily
anxieties, she resolves to make a collection among the Scandinavian
colony, and to go to the pastor of the community.

A sinful woman has pity on the man who has deserted his lawful wife!

Once more a beggar, asking for alms by means of a woman, I begin to
suspect that there is an invisible hand which guides the irresistible
logic of events. I bow before the storm, determined to rise again at
the first opportunity.

The carriage brings me to the hospital of St. Louis. On the way, in
the Rue de Rennes, I get out in order to buy two white shirts. The
winding-sheet for the last hour! I really expect a speedy death,
without being able to say why.

In the hospital I am forbidden to go out without leave; besides, my
hands are so wrapped up that all occupation is impossible to me; I
feel therefore like a prisoner. My room is bare, contains only the
most necessary things, and has nothing attractive about it. It lies
near the public sitting-room, where from morning to evening they smoke
and play cards. The bell rings for breakfast. As I sit down at the
table I find myself in a frightful company of death's-heads. Here a
nose is wanting, there an eye; there the lips hang down, here the cheek
is ulcered. Two of them do not look sick, but show in their faces
gloom and despair. These are "kleptomaniacs" of high social rank, who,
because of their powerful connections, have escaped prison by being
declared irresponsible.

An unpleasant smell of iodoform takes away my appetite. Since my hands
are muffled I must ask the help of my neighbour for cutting bread and
pouring out wine. Round this banquet of criminals and those condemned
to death goes the good Mother, the Superintendent, in her severe black
and white dress, and gives each of us his poisonous medicine. With
a glass holding arsenic I drink to a death's-head who pledges me in
digitalis. That is gruesome, and yet one must be thankful! That makes
me wild. To have to be thankful for something so petty and unpleasant!

They dress me, and undress me, and look after me like a child. The kind
sister takes a fancy to me, treats me like a baby, calls me "my child,"
while I call her "mother."

But it does me good to be able to say this word "mother," which has not
passed my lips for thirty years. The old lady, an Augustine nun, who
wears the garb of the dead, because she has never lived, is mild as
resignation itself, and teaches us to smile at our sufferings as though
they were joys, for she knows the beneficial effects of pain. She does
not utter a word of reproof nor admonition nor sermonising.

She knows the regulations of the ordinary hospitals so well that she
can allow small liberties to the patients, though not to herself.
She permits me to smoke in my room, and offers to make my cigarettes
herself; this, however, I decline. She procures for me permission to
go out beyond the regulated limits of time. When she discovers that
I am actively interested in chemistry, she takes me to the learned
apothecary of the hospital. He lends me books, and invites me, when I
acquaint him with my theory of the composite character of so-called
simple bodies, to work in his laboratory. This nun has had a great
influence on my life. I begin to reconcile myself again to my lot, and
value the happy mischance which has brought me under this kindly roof.

The first book which I take out of the apothecary's library opens of
itself, and my glance fastens like a falcon's on a line in the chapter
headed "Phosphorus." The author states briefly that the scientific
chemist, Lockyer, has demonstrated by spectral analysis that phosphorus
is not a simple body, and that his report of his experiments has been
submitted to the Parisian Academy of Science, which has not been able
to refute his proofs.

Encouraged by this unexpected support, I take my saucepans with the not
completely consumed remains of sulphur, and submit them to a bureau
for chemical analysis, which promises to give me their report the next
morning.

It is my birthday. When I return to the hospital I find a letter from
my wife. She laments my misfortune, and she wants to join me, to look
after me and love me.

The happiness of feeling myself loved in spite of everything awakes
in me the need of thankfulness. But to whom? To the Unknown, who has
remained hidden for so many years?

My heart smites me, I confess the unworthy falsehood of my supposed
infidelity, I ask for forgiveness, and before I am aware of it, I write
again a love-letter to my wife. But I postpone our meeting to a more
favourable time.

The next morning I hasten to my chemist on the Boulevard Magenta,
and bring his analysis of my powder in a closed cover back to the
hospital. When I come to the statue of St. Louis in the courtyard of
the institution, I think of the Quinze-Vingt,[1] the Sorbonne, and the
Sainte Chapelle, these three buildings founded by the Saint, which I
interpret to mean--"From suffering, through knowledge, to repentance."

Arrived at my room, I shut the doors carefully, and at last open the
paper which is to decide my destiny. The contents are as follows;
"The powder submitted to our analysis has three properties--_Colour_:
grey-blacky leaves marks on paper. _Density_: very great, greater
than the average density of graphite; it seems to be a harder kind
of graphite. The powder burns easily, releasing oxide of carbon and
carbonic acid. It therefore contains carbon."

Pure sulphur contains carbon!

I am saved. From henceforth I can prove to my friends and relations
that I am no fool. I can establish the theories which I propounded a
year ago in my _Antibarbarus_, a work which the reviews treated as that
of a charlatan or madman, making my family consequently thrust me out
as a good-for-nothing, or Cagliostro. My opponents are pulverised! My
heart beats in righteous pride; I will leave the hospital, shout in the
streets, bellow before the Institute, pull down the Sorbonne!... But my
hands remain wrapped up, and when I stand outside in the courtyard, the
high encircling walls counsel me--patience.

When I tell the apothecary the result of the analysis, he proposes to
me to summon a commission before whom I should demonstrate the solution
of the problem by experiment publicly. I, however, from dislike to
publicity, write instead an essay on the subject, and send it to the
_Temps_, where it appears after two days.

The password is given. I am answered from all sides; I find adherents,
am asked to contribute to a scientific paper, and am involved in a
correspondence which necessitates the continuance of my experiments.

       *       *       *       *       *

One Sunday, the last of my stay in the purgatory of St. Louis, I watch
the courtyard from the window. The two thieves walk up and down with
their wives and children, and embrace each other from time to time with
joyful faces, like men whom misfortune draws together in closer bonds.

My loneliness depresses me; I curse my lot and regard it as unjust,
without considering that my crime surpasses theirs in meanness. The
postman brings a letter from my wife, which is of an icy coldness. My
success has annoyed her, and she pretends that she will not believe it
till I have consulted a chemical specialist. Moreover, she warns me
against all illusions which may produce disturbance of the brain. And,
after all, she asks, What do I gain by all this? Can I feed a family
with my chemistry?

Here is the alternative again: Love or Science. Without hesitation I
write a final crushing letter, and bid her good-bye, as pleased with
myself as a murderer after his deed.

In the evening I roam about the gloomy Quarter, and cross the St.
Martin's canal. It is as dark as the grave, and seems exactly made
to drown oneself in. I remain standing at the corner of Rue Alibert.
Why Alibert? Who is he? Was not the graphite which the chemist found
in my sulphur called Alibert-graphite? Well, what of it? Strangely
enough, an impression of something not yet explained remains in my
mind. Then I enter Rue Dieu. Why "Dieu," when the Republic has washed
its hands of God? Then Rue Beaurepaire--a fine resort of criminals.
Rue de Vaudry--is the Devil conducting me? I take no more notice of
the names of the streets, wander on, turn round, find I have lost my
way, and recoil from a shed which exhales an odour of raw flesh and bad
vegetables, especially sauerkraut. Suspicious-looking figures brush
past me, muttering objurgations. I become nervous, turn to the right,
then to the left, and get into a dark blind alley, the haunt of filth
and crime. Street girls bar my way, street boys grin at me. The scene
of Christmas night is repeated, "Væ soli."[2] Who is it that plays
me these treacherous tricks as soon as I seek for solitude? Someone has
brought me into this plight. Where is he? I wish to fight with him!

As soon as I begin to run there comes down rain mixed with dirty snow.
At the bottom of a little street a great, coal-black gate is outlined
against the sky. It seems a Cyclopean work, a gate without a palace,
which opens on a sea of light. I ask a gendarme where I am. He
answers, "At St. Martin's gate."

A couple of steps bring me to the great Boulevard, which I go down. The
theatre clock points to a quarter-past seven. Business hours are over,
and my friends are waiting for me as usual in the Café Neapel. I go on
hurriedly, forgetting the hospital, trouble, and poverty. As I pass
the Café du Cardinal, I brush by a table where someone is sitting. I
only know him by name, but he knows me, and at the same moment his eyes
interrogate me: "You here? You are not in hospital then? Then it was
all gossip?"

I feel that this man is one of my unknown benefactors, for he reminds
me that I am a beggar, and have nothing to do in the café. Beggar! that
is the right word, which echoes in my ears, and colours my cheek with a
burning blush of shame, humiliation, and rage. Six weeks ago I sat here
at this table. My theatre manager sat opposite me, and called me "Dear
Sir"; journalists pestered me with their interviews; photographers
asked for the honour of selling portraits of me--and, to-day--what am I
to-day? A beggar, a marked man, an outcast from society!

Lashed, tormented, driven, like a night-tramp, I hurry down the
Boulevard back to the plague-stricken hospital. There at last, and
only there, in my cell, I feel at home. When I reflect on my lot,
I recognise again that invisible Hand which scourges and chastises
without my knowing its object. Does it grant me fame and at the same
time deny me an honourable position in the world? Must I be humbled in
order to be lifted up, made low in order to be raised high? The thought
keeps on recurring: "Providence is planning something with thee, and
this is the beginning of thy education."

In February I leave the hospital, uncured, but healed from the
temptations of the world. At parting I wished to kiss the hand of the
faithful Mother, who, without speaking many words, has taught me the
way of the Cross, but a feeling of reverence, as if before something
holy, kept me back. May she now in spirit receive this expression of
thanks from a stranger, whose traces have been lost in distant lands.


[1] Hospital for the Blind.

[2] "Woe to the solitary."




II

ST. LOUIS LEADS ME TO ORFILA


Through the whole winter I continue my chemical experiments in a
modestly furnished room, remain all day at home, and go to my evening
meal in a restaurant where artists of different nationalities meet.
Afterwards I visit the family, whose society, through a momentary fit
of puritanism, I had abjured. The whole noisy set of artists are there,
and I am compelled to put up with what I would fain avoid--free and
easy manners, loose morals, deliberate and fashionable irreligion.
There is much talent and quickness of wit among these people, together
with a flow of wild spirits which has won them a sinister reputation.
At any rate, I am in a domestic circle; they are kind to me and I am
grateful to them, although I shut my eyes and ears to their little
affairs which, after all, have nothing to do with me. Had I avoided
these people out of unjustifiable pride, it would have been logical to
punish me for it, but as my avoidance of them sprang from a desire to
purify myself and to deepen my spiritual life in self-communion, I do
not understand the ways of Providence, for I am a man of such pliable
character, that out of pure sociability and fear of being ungrateful,
I accommodate myself to my surroundings whatever they are. But after I
had been banished so long from society, through my misfortune and the
shame of my poverty, I was glad to find a shelter for the long winter
evenings, although the lubricous conversation annoyed me.

Now that the existence of the invisible Hand, which guides me over
rough paths, has become a certainty to me, I no longer feel solitary,
and keep a careful watch over my words and actions, although, it must
be confessed, I am not always successful. But whenever I slip, I am
at once arrested and punished with such punctuality and exactness,
that I have no doubts left regarding the interposition of a judicial
power. The Unknown has become for me a personal acquaintance with whom
I speak, whom I thank, whom I consult. Very often I compare Him in
my mind with the "demon" of Socrates, and the consciousness that the
unknown powers are on my side lends me an energy and confidence which
impel me to unwonted efforts of which I was formerly incapable.

A bankrupt as regards society, I am born into another world where no
one can follow me. Things which before seemed insignificant attract my
attention, my nightly dreams assume the form of premonitions, I regard
myself as a departed spirit, and my life proceeds in a new sphere.

       *       *       *       *       *

After having demonstrated the presence of carbon in sulphur, I have to
demonstrate the presence of hydrogen and oxygen which, according to
analogy, ought to be found in it.

Two months pass in calculations and surmises till the apparatus
necessary for making the experiments is exhausted. A friend advises me
to go to the Sorbonne laboratory, where strangers are admitted. But my
timidity and shyness of crowds does not permit me to think of it; I
suspend my experiments and take a rest.

One fine spring morning I wake up in good spirits. I walk through the
Rue de la grande Chaumière to the Rue de Fleurs, which leads to the
Jardin du Luxembourg. The small, pretty street is quiet, the great
avenue of chestnut trees is cheerful and green, broad and straight as
a racecourse. Quite in the background the statue of David rises like a
boundary mark, and high over all the dome of the Pantheon, surmounted
by a golden cross, seems to touch the clouds. I remain standing,
delighted with the significant spectacle, when accidentally on my
right my eyes fall on a dyer's shield at the end of the Rue de Fleurs.
Painted on the window of the dyeing-house stand over a silver cloud the
initials of my name A.S., and over them is arched a rainbow.

_Omen accipio!_ and am reminded of the passage in Genesis, "I have set
my bow in the clouds to be a sign of the covenant between me and the
earth."

I seem no longer to touch the ground, but to float in air, and
with winged feet enter the garden, which is now quite empty. In
this early morning hour I am the exclusive possessor of this park,
with all its glory of roses, and I know all my flowers in their
beds--chrysanthemums, verbenas, and begonias.

Going down the racecourse I reach the boundary mark, pass through the
trellised gate to the Rue Soufflot, and turn to the Boulevard St.
Michel, where Blanchard's antiquarian book-shop attracts my attention.
Casually I take up an old chemical work by Orfila, open it at haphazard
and read, "Sulphur has been classified among the simple bodies. Davy
and Berthollet, however, have endeavoured to prove by their able
experiments that it contains hydrogen, oxygen, and a third basal
element which has not yet been distinguished."

One may imagine my almost religious ecstasy at this well-nigh
miraculous discovery. Davy and Berthollet had demonstrated the presence
of hydrogen and oxygen, and I of carbon. It rests, therefore, with me
to lay down the formula for sulphur.

Two days later my name was entered on the list of the scientific
faculty of the Sorbonne (founded by St. Louis!), and I received
permission to work in the laboratory. The first morning I went there
was for me a solemn occasion. I was under no illusions as regards the
professors, who had received me with the cold politeness due even to a
foreign intruder. I knew that I should never be able to convince them,
but I felt simultaneously a calm still joy, and the courage of a martyr
who faces a hostile crowd, because for me at my age youth was the
natural enemy.

As I crossed over the square before the little church of the Sorbonne,
I found the door of it open and entered it, without any definite
reason; the Virgin Mother and Child smiled at me in a friendly way; the
Cross left me, as always, cold and without comprehension of its meaning.

My new acquaintance, St. Louis, the friend of the poor and
plague-stricken, receives the homage of young theologians. Can it be,
after all, that he is my patron, my guardian angel, who drove me to the
hospital, so that I, purified by the fire of mental suffering, should
win again that glory which leads to dishonour and contempt? Was it
he who directed me to Blanchard's book-shop and hither also? See how
superstitious the atheist has become!

As I survey the memorial tablets which record successful experiments, I
vow, in the case of my success, to receive no worldly honour.

The hour has struck, and I run the gauntlet of the young students who
regard my undertaking with scorn and prejudice.

       *       *       *       *       *

About fourteen days have passed, and I have discovered incontrovertible
proofs that sulphur is a threefold combination of carbon, oxygen, and
hydrogen. I thank the Director of the laboratory, who, as it appears,
takes no interest in my affairs, and leave this new purgatory full of
deep, unspeakable joy.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the mornings when I do walk in the churchyard of Montparnasse, I
visit the park of the Palais Luxembourg. A few days after my departure
from the Sorbonne I discover, in the centre of the churchyard, a
monument of classical beauty. A white marble medallion shows the noble
features of an old man of science, whom the inscription on the pedestal
describes as "Orfila: Chemist and Physiologist." It was my friend and
protector who, in later years, has so often guided me through the
labyrinth of chemical experiments.

A week later, passing through the Rue d'Assas, I stop to admire a house
which looks like a convent. A large shield on the wall informs me that
it is "Hôtel Orfila."

Again and again Orfila!




III

PARADISE REGAINED


The summer and autumn of the year 1895 I count, on the whole, among the
happiest stages of my eventful life. All my attempts succeed; unknown
friends bring me food as the ravens did to Elijah. Money flows in; I
can buy books and scientific instruments; among them a microscope,
which reveals to me the secrets of life.

Dead to the world, as I have renounced the vain delights of Paris,
I remain in my quarter, where every morning I visit the dead in the
churchyard of Montparnasse, and thence descend to the Luxembourg Garden
to greet my flowers. Sometimes one of my fellow-countrymen on his way
through Paris visits me in order to invite me to breakfast on the
other side of the river, and to go to the theatre with him. I decline,
because the right bank is forbidden to me; it is the so-called "world,"
the world of the living and of vanity.

Although I cannot formulate it distinctly, a kind of religion has
been forming in me. It is rather a condition of the soul than a view
of things based on dogmatic instruction; a chaos of sensations which
condense themselves more or less into thoughts.

I have bought a Catholic prayer book, and read it with a collected
mind; the Old Testament comforts and chastens me in a somewhat obscure
fashion, while the New leaves me cold. This does not prevent a
Buddhistic book having a stronger influence on me than all other sacred
books, because it ranks positive suffering above mere abstinence.
Buddha shows the courage when in full possession of vital energy and
enjoyment of married happiness to renounce wife and child, while Christ
avoids every contact with the permitted joys of this world.

For the rest, I do not brood much over the sensations which spring up
in me; I keep myself indifferent and let them come and go, approving
for myself the same freedom which I owe to others.

The great event of the Paris season was Brunetière's war-cry, "The
bankruptcy of Science." Dedicated from my childhood to the natural
sciences, and later on a disciple of Darwin, I had discovered how
unsatisfactory the scientific method is, which accepts the mechanism
of the universe without presupposing a Mechanician. The weakness of
the system showed itself in the gradual degeneration of science; it
had marked off a boundary line over which one was not to step. "We,"
it said, "have solved all problems; the world has no more riddles."
This presumptuous lie had annoyed me already in 1880, and during the
following fifteen years I occupied myself with a revision of the
natural sciences. In 1884 I doubted the supposed composition of the
atmosphere. The nitrogen of the air is not identical with the nitrogen
obtained by analysis of a nitrogenous body. In 1891 I visited the
Scientific Institute in Lund in order to compare the spectrum analyses
of these two sorts of nitrogen whose difference I had discovered. Do I
need to describe the reception which the learned scientists gave me?
Now in this year, 1895, the discovery of argon has confirmed my former
hypotheses, and given a fresh impulse to my investigations which had
been interrupted by a foolish marriage. It is not Science which is
bankrupt, only the antiquated, degenerate science, and Brunetière was
right although he was wrong.

While all acknowledged the identity of matter and called themselves
Monists, without being so really, I went further and drew the extreme
logical inferences of the theory by obliterating the boundaries
between matter and so-called spirit. Thus, in 1894, in my treatise
_Antibarbarus_, I had dealt with the psychology of sulphur by
explaining it through "ontogeny," that is, the embryonic development of
sulphur.

Anyone who is interested in the subject may be referred to the work
_Sylva Sylvarum_, which I composed in the summer and autumn of 1895,
with a feeling of pride in my perspicuity at having divined the secrets
of creation, especially in the vegetable and animal kingdoms. He may
further consult my _Churchyard Studies_, which show how in loneliness
and sorrow I was brought back to a wavering apprehension of God and
immortality.




IV

THE FALL AND PARADISE LOST


Guided into this new world in which no one can follow me, I conceived
an aversion to social intercourse, and have an unconquerable desire to
free myself from my surroundings. I therefore informed my friends that
I wished to go to Meudon to write a book which required solitude and
quiet.

At the same time insignificant disagreements led to a breach with the
circle which met at the Restaurant, so that one day I found myself
entirely isolated. The first result was an extraordinary expansion
of my inner sense; a spiritual power which longed to realise itself.
I believed myself in the possession of unlimited strength, and pride
inspired me with the wild idea of seeing whether I could perform a
miracle.

At an earlier period, in the great crisis of my life, I had observed
that I could exercise a telepathic influence on absent friends. In
popular legends writers have occupied themselves with the subjects of
telepathy and witchcraft. I wish neither to do myself an injustice,
nor altogether to acquit myself of wrong-doing, but I believe that
my evil will was not so evil as the counterstroke which I received.
A devouring curiosity, an outbreak of perverted love, caused by my
frightful loneliness, inspired me with an intense longing to be
re-united with my wife and child, both of whom I still loved. But how
was this to be brought about, as divorce proceedings were already on
foot? Some extraordinary event, a common misfortune, a thunderbolt, a
conflagration ... in brief, some catastrophe which unites two hearts,
just as in novels two persons are reconciled at the sick-bed of a
third. Stop! there I have it! A sick-bed! Children are always more or
less ill; a mother's fear exaggerates the danger; a telegram follows,
and all is said.

I had no idea of practising magic, but an unwholesome instinct
suggested I must set to work with the picture of my dear little
daughter, who later on was to be my only comfort in a cursed existence.

Further on in this work I will relate the results of my manoeuvre,
in which my evil purpose seemed to work with the help of symbolical
operations. Meantime the results had to be waited for, and I continued
my work with a feeling of undefined uneasiness and a foreboding of
fresh misfortune.

       *       *       *       *       *

One evening, as I sat alone before my microscope, an occurrence
happened which made all the deeper impression on me because I did
not understand it. For four days I had let a nut germinate, and now
detached the germ. This had the shape of a heart, not much larger than
the core of a pear. Standing between two cotyledons it looked like
a diminutive human brain. One may imagine my surprise when I saw on
the glass-slide of the microscope two tiny hands, white as alabaster,
folded as if in prayer. Was it a vision, an hallucination? Oh, no! It
was a crushing reality which made me shudder. The little hands were
stretched out towards me, immovable, as if adjuring me. I could count
the five fingers, the thumb shorter than the others--real woman's or
child's hands.

I made a friend, who surprised me watching this astonishing sight,
witness it also. He required to be no clairvoyant in order to see two
clasped hands which besought the sympathy of the beholder.

What was it? Nothing but the two first rudimentary leaves of a
walnut tree, the _Juglans regia_--nothing else. Yet the fact was
undeniable that ten human fingers were clasped in a beseeching gesture
as if expressing, "De profundis clamavi ad te." But as a still too
incredulous empiric, I passed by the occurrence callously.

       *       *       *       *       *

The fall has happened. I feel the mercilessness of the unknown powers
weigh heavily upon me. The hand of the invisible is lifted and the
blows fall thickly upon my head.

In the first place, my anonymous friend who has supported me hitherto,
feels insulted and deserts me, because I had written him a presumptuous
letter. So I am left without means.

Moreover, when I receive the proofs of my work _Sylva Sylvarum_, I
find the text in complete confusion. Not only are the pages mixed and
wrongly numbered, but the different parts are confused, so that in an
ironical way they represent the great disorder which rules in nature.
After endless hesitations and delays, the pamphlet is at last printed,
but when the printer sends me the bill, I find that it amounts to
more than double the sum originally agreed upon. I am obliged, to
my regret, to pawn my microscope, my black suit, and some remaining
ornaments, but, at any rate, my work is printed, and I have for the
first time in my life the conviction that I have said something
original, great, and beautiful. In a mood of exultation, easy to
understand, I carry the packet to the post, and making a contemptuous
gesture towards the hostile heavens, I throw it in the letter-box with
the thought, "Listen, Sphinx, I have solved thy riddle, and defy thee!"

On my return to the house the hotel bill is handed to me. Irritated by
this unexpected stroke, for I have already lived a year here, I begin
to notice trifles which I had formerly overlooked. For instance, in
three adjoining rooms pianos are being played. I am convinced it is a
plot of some Scandinavian ladies whose company I have avoided.

Three pianos! and I cannot leave the hotel, for I have no money.
Cursing heaven, these ladies, and my fate, I go to sleep. The next
morning I am awoken by an unexpected noise. They are hammering nails in
the room which is near my bed; then more hammering begins on the other
side. A silly trick quite in keeping with the character of these female
pianists, nothing more! But when after supper I lie down to sleep as
usual, there ensues such a din overhead that some of the plaster falls
from the ceiling on my head.

I go to the landlady and complain about the other lodgers. She declares
that she has heard nothing, but, for the rest, is very polite, and
promises to turn out anyone who dares to disturb me, for she is anxious
to keep me in her hotel, which is not prospering very well.

Without attaching much credit to the word of a woman, I still believe
she means to treat me well in her own interests. None the less the
noises continue, and I come to the conclusion that these ladies--stupid
people!--want to make me believe that there are "rapping spirits" in
the house. At the same time my companions in the restaurant alter their
behaviour towards me, and a concealed hostility shows itself in their
envious looks and innuendoes. Weary of the struggle, I bid farewell
to the hotel and restaurant, and depart, plundered to my last shirt,
leaving behind my books and other things. On February 21, 1896, I
entered the Hôtel Orfila.




V

PURGATORY


Hôtel Orfila has a monastic appearance, and is a boarding establishment
for Catholic students. It is superintended by a quiet, amiable Abbé,
and peace, order, and morality prevail here. What especially comforts
me after so many annoyances is, that women are not admitted here. The
house is old, the rooms are low, the passages dark, and the wooden
staircases wind and twist hither and thither as if in a labyrinth.
There is an air of mysteriousness about the whole building, which for
a long time has attracted me. My room looks out on a _cul-de-sac_, so
that standing in the middle of it, one sees nothing but a moss-grown
wall with two small round windows in it. But when I sit at my table
close to the window, I have an uncommonly pleasant look-out. Under me
there is a circular wall overgrown with ivy surrounding a courtyard,
where young girls walk under plane trees and acacias. In the centre
there stands a charming Gothic chapel. Somewhat farther on one sees
high walls with numerous little barred windows, which remind one of a
convent. Still farther away are old, half-hidden houses crowned by a
forest of chimneys, and in the extreme distance one sees the tower of
Notre-Dame des Champs surmounted by a cross and weathercock. In my room
there hangs a faded likeness of St. Vincent de Paul, and a picture of
St. Peter looks down on my bed. St. Peter, the opener of the gates of
heaven. What an ironical situation for me, who some years ago threw
ridicule on the Apostle in a fantastic drama!

Quite contented with my room, I sleep well the first night. I edify
myself by reading the book of Job, and arrive at an ever clearer
conviction that the Eternal has handed me over to Satan to be tried.
This thought comforts me again, and suffering seems to me a mark of
confidence on the part of the Almighty.

Now things begin to happen which cannot be explained without the
co-operation of the unknown powers. From this point I use the entries
in my journal, which have gradually become very numerous, giving them
in a condensed form.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a long while my chemical studies have lain in abeyance. In order to
revive my interest, and to make a decisive stroke, I resume the study
of the problem of making gold. The starting-point of the investigation
consists in the question: Why does sulphate of iron in a solution of
choloro-aurate of sodium precipitate gold? The answer is, because iron
and sulphur are essential constituents of gold. The proof is that all
natural compounds of sulphur and iron contain more or less gold. So I
begin to experiment with solutions of sulphate of iron.

One morning I awoke with the idea of making a trip into the country,
though it is quite against my tastes and my habits. When I, more by
accident than design, reach the station of Montparnasse, I take the
train for Meudon. I go into the village itself, which I visit for the
first time, traverse the main street, and turn to the right into a
narrow alley confined by walls on both sides. Twenty steps before me I
see half-buried in the ground the figure of a Roman knight in grey iron
armour. It looks very well modelled, but, as I approach, I see that it
is only rough metal-smelting.

But I hold my illusion fast, since it pleases me. The knight looks
towards the wall, and following the direction of his gaze I notice
something written on the mortar with a piece of coal. It looks like the
letters F and S interlaced, which are the initials of my wife's name.
She loves me still! The next moment I see, as by a flash, that it is
the chemical symbol for ferrum (iron) and sulphur, and the secret of
gold lies revealed before my gaze. I search the ground and find two
leaden seals fastened together by a string. One displays the initials
V.P., the other, a king's crown. Without committing myself to a further
interpretation of this adventure, I return to Paris with the lively
impression of having experienced something bordering on the marvellous.

       *       *       *       *       *

In my fireplace I burn coals which, because of their round and regular
shape, are called "monks' heads." One day when the fire is nearly
extinguished I take out a mass of coal of fantastic shape. It resembles
a cock's head with a splendid comb joined to what looks like a human
trunk with twisted limbs. It might have been a demon from some mediæval
witches' sabbath.

The second day I take out again a fine group of two gnomes or drunken
dwarfs, who embrace each other while their clothes flutter in the
wind. It is a masterpiece of primitive culture.

The third day it is a Madonna and Child in the Byzantine style, of
incomparable beauty of outline. After I have drawn copies of all three
in black chalk, I place them on my table. A friendly painter visits me;
he regards the three statuettes with growing curiosity, and asks who
has "made" them. In order to try him, I mention the name of a Norwegian
sculptor. "No," he says, "I should rather be inclined to ascribe them
to Kittelsen, the famous illustrator of the Swedish legends."

I do not believe in demons, and yet I wish to see the impression which
my little figures make on the sparrows who generally take their crumbs
from my window-sill. So I place them there. The sparrows are frightened
and remain aloof. There is then some likeness in the figures which they
can distinguish, and some reality in this conjunction of dead material
and fire.

The sun, as it warms my little figures, makes the demon with the cock's
head collapse. This reminds me of the country-people's saying that if
the dwarfs wait too long till sunrise, they die.

       *       *       *       *       *

Things happen in the hotel which disquiet me. The morning after my
arrival I find on the board where the keys of the rooms are hung up, on
the ground-floor, a letter addressed to a Mr. X., a student, who has
the same name as my wife. The postmark is "Dornach," the name of the
Austrian village where my wife and child live. But since I am certain
that there is no post-office at Dornach, the matter remains mysterious.
This letter, placed in such a conspicuous position as to challenge the
eye, is followed by others. The second bears the postmark "Vienna," and
is addressed to a Dr. Bitter; the third displays the Polish pseudonym,
"Schmulachowsky."

The Devil certainly has a share in this game, for this name is a
false one, and I understand well for whom the letter is intended--for
a deadly enemy of mine who lives in Berlin. At last there arrives a
letter with the postmark "Vienna," which, according to the printed
envelope, comes from the chemical bureau of Dr. Eder. So they are
trying to spy out my gold-making experiments! Without doubt a plot is
on foot here, but the Devil has mixed these sharpers' cards. These
duffers do not consider that I keep my eyes open towards all quarters
of the compass.

I have made inquiries of the waiter regarding Mr. X., but he gives me
in all simplicity to understand that he is an Alsatian--nothing more.
One fine morning I return from my work and see in the letter-rack quite
close to my keys a post card. For a moment I feel tempted to solve the
riddle by looking at the post card, but my good angel paralysed my
hand, just as the young man came out of his hiding-place behind the
door. I look him in the face and am startled; he is exactly like my
wife. We greet each other silently, and each goes his way.

I have never been able to unravel this conspiracy, since I did not know
the actors in this drama. Moreover, my wife has neither brothers nor
cousins. This undefined threatening spectre of a continuous vengeance
tortured me for half a year. I bore it like everything else as a
punishment for known and unknown sins.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the New Year a stranger turned up in our restaurant. He was an
American artist, and came exactly at the right time to put new life
into our depressed society. But though he was an active and bold spirit
with cosmopolitan ideas and good company too, he inspired me with
an undefined mistrust. In spite of his confident air his demeanour
revealed to me his real position. The crash came quicker than one
expected.

One evening the unfortunate man came into my room and asked for
permission to remain there a short time. He looked like a lost man, and
such in fact he was. His landlord had driven him out of his studio, his
grisette had left him, he was head over ears in debt, and his creditors
were dunning him; he was insulted in the streets by the supporters of
his unpaid models. But what depressed him most of all was that the
cruel landlord had retained his picture intended for the Champ de Mars
Exhibition. The originality of its subject had given him good grounds
to hope for its success. It displayed an "emancipated woman" crucified
and cursed by the mob.

Since he was also heavily in debt to the restaurant, he had to go
about the streets, hungry. Among other things he confessed that he had
taken morphia enough to kill two people, but death apparently did not
yet want him. After an earnest discussion, we agreed to go to another
quarter, and there eat our meals in some obscure cook-shop. I said I
would not desert him, and that he should pluck up new courage and
begin a new picture for the exhibition of independent artists.

       *       *       *       *       *

This man becomes now my sole companion, and his misfortunes cause me a
double share of suffering, so closely do I identify myself with him.
I do so in a spirit of defiance, but presently gain an interesting
experience thereby.

He reveals to me his whole past. He is a German by birth, but partly
because of family disagreements, partly because of a lampoon for
which he had been brought into court, he has spent seven years in
America. I discover in him intelligence above the average, a melancholy
temperament, and unbridled sensuality. But behind this mask of a
cosmopolitan I begin to divine another character which disquiets me,
and the full discovery of which I postpone to a favourable opportunity.

Thus pass two months, while I live in union with this stranger and
with him go through all the troubles of an unfortunate artist over
again, without remembering that I am a made man, yes, and rank among
the dramatic celebrities of Paris, though, as a chemical discoverer,
I think little of it now. Moreover, my companion loves me only when I
conceal my successes. If I am obliged to refer to them in passing,
he is annoyed, and assumes the rôle of an unfortunate nonentity, so
that at last, out of sympathy, I put on the air of an old decayed
wreck. This imperceptibly depresses me, while he, who has his future
still before him, elevates himself again at my expense. I am like a
corpse buried at the root of a tree which sucks nutriment out of the
decomposing life, and grows upwards.

At this time I study Buddhist books, and wonder at the self-denial with
which I mortify myself for another. But good works deserve a reward,
and mine did not remain wanting.

One day the _Revue des Revues_ comes with a likeness of the American
prophet and empiric doctor, Francis Schlatter, who in the year 1895
cured five thousand sick persons and then disappeared without ever
being seen again. Now this man's features resembled in a remarkable
way those of my new companion. To confirm my supposition, I show the
_Revue_ to a Swedish sculptor with whom I have an appointment in the
Café de Versailles. He notices the resemblance at once, and reminds me
of a remarkable coincidence of circumstances. Both the doctor and my
friend were Germans by birth, and worked in America. Still further, the
disappearance of Schlatter coincided with the appearance of our friend
in Paris. Since I am initiated a little into the use of occultist
expressions, I start the hypothesis that Francis Schlatter is the
"double" who leads an independent life, without being aware of it.

When I mentioned the word "double" my sculptor was startled, and
drew my attention to the fact that our friend always occupied two
houses, one on the right and the other on the left bank of the river.
Moreover, I learn that my mysterious friend lives a double life in
this sense, that, after he has spent the evening in half-philosophic,
half-religious discussions with me, he is always seen late at night in
Bullier's dancing-saloon.

There is a sure means of proving the identity of these two "doubles,"
as the _Revue des Revues_ contains a facsimile letter of Francis
Schlatter. "Come to dinner to-night," I suggested. "I will dictate to
him Schlatter's letter; if the two handwritings, and especially the
signatures, resemble each other, it will be a proof."

At dinner the same evening everything is confirmed, the handwriting and
signatures are identical. A little surprised, the artist submits to our
examination; at last he asks: "What is your object in this?"

"Do you know Francis Schlatter?"

"I have never heard the name."

"Don't you remember that doctor in America last year."

"Oh, yes! that quack!"

He remembers, and I show him the portrait and facsimile.

He laughs sceptically, and remains quite calm and indifferent. That is
all.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some days later I am sitting with my mysterious friend, with our
glasses of absinthe, on the terrace of the Café de Versailles, when a
fellow in workman's clothes, with a malicious aspect, suddenly stops
before the café, then rushes through the customers, and bawls at my
friend in his loudest voice: "At last I have you, you sharper, who
fleeced me! What is the meaning of it? First of all, you order a cross
for thirty francs, and then you disappear. Son of a dog! Do you think a
cross like that makes itself?"

He continued to rage. The café waiters vainly attempted to remove him;
he threatened to fetch the police, while the unfortunate accused,
motionless, dumb, and prostrate, like a condemned man, remained
exposed to the gaze of a circle of artists who all knew him more or
less. When the commotion was over, I asked him with a bewildered mind,
as if I had witnessed a witches' sabbath: "What cross worth thirty
francs? I don't understand a word of the business?"

"It was a model of Joan of Arc's cross which I was going to use for my
picture of the crucified woman."

"He certainly was a devil, that workman."

After a pause, I continue: "It is odd, but one does not play unpunished
either with the Cross or with Joan of Arc."

"You believe in them?"

"I don't know!--But the thirty pieces of silver!"

"Enough! Enough!" he exclaims in a tone of vexation.

From this evening a certain coldness ensues between us. Our
acquaintance had now lasted four terrible months. My companion had
studied in quite a new school, and had time to strike out new paths in
his art, so that he could finally throw aside "the crucified woman"
as an old toy. He had learned to regard suffering as the only real
joy in life, and so had attained to resignation. He was a hero in his
poverty. I admired him when twice in the same day he measured on foot
the distance between Montrouge and the Market Halls with boots worn
down at the heel, and without food. In the evening, when he had visited
the offices of seventeen illustrated papers, and sold three drawings,
without however being paid for them at once, he quickly swallowed two
sous' worth of bread and hurried to the Bal Bullier.

At last, in silent agreement, we dissolved the partnership we had
entered on for mutual help. We both felt that it was enough, and that
our destinies must go on to separate fulfilments. When we exchanged our
last farewells, I knew that they were our last. I have never seen the
man again, nor heard what has become of him.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the course of the spring, while I was feeling depressed by my own
and my friend's untoward destiny, I received a letter from the children
of my first marriage, informing me that they had been very ill in
hospital. When I compared the time of their illness with my mischievous
attempt at magic, I was alarmed. I had frivolously played with hidden
forces, and now my evil purpose, guided by an unseen Hand, had reached
its goal, and struck my heart. I do not excuse myself, and only ask
the reader to remember this fact, in case he should ever feel inclined
to practise magic, especially those forms of it called wizardry, or
more properly witchcraft, and whose reality has been placed beyond all
doubt by De Rochas.[1]

One Sunday before Easter I went very early through the Jardin de
Luxembourg, crossed the street, and passed under the arcades of the
Odeon; I stood still before an edition of Balzac in a blue binding,
and by chance picked out his novel _Séraphita_. Why just that one?
Perhaps it is an unconscious recollection of reading a criticism of my
book, _Sylva Sylvarum_, in the periodical _Initiation_, in which I was
called "a countryman of Swedenborg." When I got home I opened the book,
which was almost entirely unknown to me, for so many years had passed
between my first acquaintance with it and this second reading. It was
like a new work to me, and now my mind was prepared for it, I swallowed
down the contents of this extraordinary book wholesale. I had never
read anything of Swedenborg, for in his own native land and mine he
passed for a charlatan, dreamer, and quack. But now I was seized with
enthusiastic admiration, as I heard this heavenly giant of the last
century speak by the mouth of such a genial French interpreter.

I read now with religious attention, and found on page 16 the 20th of
March given as the day on which Swedenborg died. I stopped, considered,
and consulted the almanac; it was exactly the 20th of March, and also
Palm Sunday. It was then that Swedenborg entered into my life, in
which he was to play such a great part as judge and master, and on the
anniversary of his death he brought me the palm, whether of the victor
or the martyr--who could say?

_Séraphita_ became my gospel, and caused me to enter into such a close
connection with the other world, that I felt sick of life, and an
irresistible homesickness for heaven seized me. Doubtless, I was being
prepared for a higher existence. I despised the earth, the impure
earth, its inhabitants and their doings. I felt like a perfectly
righteous man, whom the Eternal was testing, and whom the purgatory of
this world would soon make fit for deliverance. The courage produced
by the consciousness of my confidential relation to the powers was
always increased, when I saw my scientific experiments crowned with
success. According to my computations and the observations of the
metallurgists, I had succeeded in making gold, and I believed I could
prove it. I sent my proofs to Rouen to a friendly chemist. He opposed
me with counter-arguments, and for eight days I could find no flaw in
them. Then turning over by chance the _Chemistry_ of my Master Orfila,
I learned the secret of my mistake.

This old, forgotten, and despised chemical treatise of 1830 helped me
at the critical moment, and became my oracle. My friends Orfila and
Swedenborg protected, encouraged, and chastised me. They did not appear
to me in dreams or waking visions, but in small daily occurrences
showed me that they did not leave me alone in the vicissitudes of my
life. The spirits had become naturalistic like the times, which were no
longer content with visions.

The following, for instance, cannot be explained by the word,
"coincidence."

I had succeeded in producing spots of gold on paper, and I wished now
to do the same on a large scale in the furnace. A couple of hundred
experiments failed, and I laid the blow-pipe aside in despair. One
morning, I walked to the Observatory Avenue, where I often used to
admire the group of the four quarters of the world, for the secret
reason that the most graceful of the female figures resembled my wife.
It stood under the armillary sphere and the sign Pisces, and a pair
of sparrows had built their nest behind her back. At the foot of the
monument I found two pieces of cardboard cut in an oval shape, one
stamped with the number 207, the other with the number 28. These are
the signs for the atomic weight of lead, and of silicium. I made a note
of the discovery, and when I got home began a series of experiments
with lead, leaving silicium for another time. As I was aware, from
my knowledge of metallurgy, that lead refined in a furnace, fed with
bone-ashes, always produces a recognisable amount of silver, and this
silver, a little gold, I drew the conclusion that phosphate of lime,
being the chief constituent of bone-ashes, must be an important element
in the gold produced from lead.

And, as a matter of fact, molten lead poured upon a deposit of chalk
containing phosphate of lime, also assumed on its under-side a
golden colour. The powers, being unpropitious, did not allow me to
finish my experiments. A year later, in Lund, a sculptor, who made
experiments in his own potteries, gave me some glaze composed of lead
and silicium, by means of which I for the first time produced in the
furnace mineralised gold of great beauty. Out of gratitude, I showed
him the two pieces of cardboard numbered 207 and 28. Is one to call it
"accident" or "coincidence," this sign of an irrefragable logic?

       *       *       *       *       *

I repeat that I have never been plagued by visions, but actual objects
sometimes seem to me to assume a human shape in a grandiose style.
Thus, one day the cushion which my head has been pressing during a
mid-day siesta, looks like a marble head carved in the style of Michael
Angelo. One evening when I return home in the company of the "double"
of the American empiric doctor, I discover, in the half-shadow of the
alcove where my bed is, what looks like a gigantic Zeus reposing on it.
Before this unexpected sight my friend remains seized with an almost
religious fear. His artistic eye comprehends at once the beauty of the
outline. "There is a great forgotten art," he says, "born again! That
is where we ought to learn drawing!"

The more one looks at it, the more lifelike and terrible it appears.
Obviously, the spirits have become realists like the rest of us
mortals. It is no mere accident, for on certain days the cushion takes
the shape of terrible monsters, such as Gothic dragons and serpents;
and one night after I have spent a hilarious evening, I am greeted
on my return by a mediæval demon, a devil with horned head and other
appurtenances. I was not at all frightened; it looked so natural,
but it also made on my mind the impression of something abnormal and
unearthly.

When I invited my friend the sculptor to look at it, he was not at
all astonished, and called me into his studio, where a pencil sketch
hanging on the wall surprised me by its grace of outline.

"Where have you got that from?" I asked. "A Madonna, is n't it?

"Yes, a Madonna of Versailles, copied from the floating plants in a
Swiss lake!"

A new-discovered art of nature! Naturalistic clairvoyance! Why blame
naturalism when it introduces a new art full of capacities of growth
and development. The old gods return, and the watchword of the poets
and artists, "Back to Pan!" has roused such a strong echo that nature
has awoken from her long sleep of centuries. Nothing can exist on earth
without the concurrence of the powers. Now naturalism did once exist,
therefore it ought to be, and what ought it obviously to be--a new-born
harmony of matter and spirit.

The sculptor is a seer. He tells me that he has seen Orpheus and Christ
side by side in a block of stone, and adds that he intends to return
there and use them as models for a group for the Salon.

As I went down the Rue de Rennes one evening with the same seer, he
drew my attention to a book-shop window where coloured lithographs were
exhibited. They represented fantastic scenes with human bodies whose
heads were replaced by pansies. In spite of my botanical observations,
I had never before seen the likeness between the pansy and the human
face. My friend seemed greatly surprised at it.

"Only think!" he said. "When I came home last evening the pansies in
my window-box looked at me like so many human faces. I thought it was
a hallucination of my overexcited nerves. And here are these pictures
drawn a long time ago. It is then a fact and no illusion, for this
unknown artist has made the same discovery before me."

We make progress in the art of vision, and this time it is I who
discover a Napoleon with his marshals on the cupola of the dome of the
Hôtel des Invalides. When one comes from Montparnasse to the Boulevard
des Invalides, one sees above the Rue Oudinot the cupola, the corbels,
and cornices of the substructure of the cupola displayed in the full
light of the setting sun, and apparently assuming human forms which
appear more or less distant according to the point of observation from
which they are viewed. There are Napoleon, Bernadotte, Berthier, and my
friend copies them, "after nature."

"How would you explain this phenomenon?" he asks.

"Explain? Has one ever explained anything by replacing one heap of
words with another heap of words?"

"You don't think, then, that the architect has worked according to a
hidden plan?"

"Listen, my friend. Jules Mansard, who built the dome in 1706, could
not well have foreseen the silhouette of Napoleon who was born in 1769.
That is a sufficient answer!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Often I have dreams at night, and these dreams prognosticate my future,
warn me against dangers, and reveal to me secrets. For instance, a
long-deceased friend appears to me in a dream, and shows me a piece of
money of uncommon size. On my asking where this remarkable piece came
from, he answers, "From America," and disappears.

The next day I receive a letter from America from a friend whom I
had heard nothing of for twenty years, informing me that an order in
connection with the Chicago Exhibition had been following me in vain
all over Europe. It carried with it an honorarium of 12,000 francs, an
enormous sum for me in my desperate circumstances, which I could very
easily find use for. This 12,000 francs would have secured my future,
and no one besides myself would have guessed that the loss of this
money was a punishment for an evil deed which I had committed out of
anger at the treachery of a literary colleague.

In another dream of wider significance I saw Jonas Lie,[2] with a gilt
bronze clock curiously ornamented. Some days later, when I went to walk
on the Boulevard St. Michel, a watch-maker's shop-window attracted my
attention. "Jonas Lie's clock!" I exclaimed aloud.

It was indeed the same. It was crowned by a celestial globe on which
two female figures leaned; the works were supported by four pillars,
and on the globe a date-indicator pointed to the 13th of August. In a
future chapter I will explain what the fateful 13th of August brought
with it. This and other occurrences took place during my stay in the
Hôtel Orfila between 6th February and 19th July, 1896. Concurrently
with them a larger adventure pursued its often interrupted course till,
with my exit from the hotel, a new section of my life began.

Spring has returned; the valley of tears and sighs under my window
is green and blossoming. Foliage hides the bare ground and its
unsightliness. The Gehenna has turned into a Vale of Sharon full of
lilies, lilacs, and acacias. I feel very melancholy, but the merry
laughter of the girls who play unseen beneath the trees, reaches me and
rouses me again to life. Life hurries by and old age approaches: Wife,
children, home, dispersed and wrecked; without is spring, within is
autumn.

The Book of Job and the Lamentations of Jeremiah comfort me, for, at
any rate, there is a certain resemblance between Job's lot and mine. Am
I not smitten with incurable boils? Am I not visited with poverty and
forsaken by my friends? "I go blackened, but not by the sun; I am a
brother to dragons and a companion to ostriches; my skin is black and
falleth from me, and my bones are burned with heat. My harp is turned
to mourning, and my pipe unto the voice of them that weep."

Thus Job. And Jeremiah with two words fathoms the depth of my sadness:
"I forgat prosperity."

In this mood I sit one oppressive afternoon bent over my work, when,
all of a sudden, behind the foliage of the garden in front of me, I
hear the playing of a piano. Like a war-horse at the sound of the
trumpet, I prick up my ears, straighten myself, and in a great state
of excitement struggle for breath. Someone is playing Schumann's
_Aufschwung_; and what is more, _he_ is playing--he, my Russian friend,
my pupil who called me "Father," because he owed all his culture to me,
my assistant who called me "Master" and kissed my hands, whose life
began where mine ended. He has come from Vienna to Paris to ruin me,
as he ruined me in Vienna--and why? Because Fate has arranged that his
present wife, before he knew her, was my sweetheart. Was it my fault
that matters so fell out? Surely not, and yet he hated me with a
deadly hatred, hindered my plays from being accepted, wove intrigues,
and deprived me of the barest means of subsistence. Then, in a fit of
rage, I reversed the spear and struck him, indeed, in such a brutal and
cowardly way, that it made me feel like a murderer. The fact that he
has come to kill me comforts me, for death alone can deliver me from my
pangs of conscience.

It was he, then, who lurked behind those letters with false addresses
which I always saw near the porter's lodge. Well, let him strike! I
will not defend myself. For he is right, and my life is nothing to me.
He continues to play the _Aufschwung_, which no one can play so well.
He plays invisible behind the green wall, and his magic harmonies rise
above its blossoming creepers like butterflies flying towards the sun.

But why is he playing? Is it to inform me of his coming to frighten
me and drive me to flight? Perhaps I shall find out in the restaurant
where the other Russians have long been talking about the arrival of
their countryman.

I go for my evening meal there, and already at the doorway encounter
hostile glances. The whole company, informed of my conflict with the
Russian, has turned against me. In order to disarm them, I open fire
myself.

"Popoffsky is in Paris?" I ask.

"No, not yet," one of them answers.

"Yes," says another, "he has been seen in the office of the _Mercure de
France_."

They disagree with each other, and at the end I am as wise as before,
but I pretend to believe all I am told. But the obvious enmity with
which I am regarded in the restaurant makes me swear not to go there
again. I am sorry, for some of them were really congenial to me. Thus,
once more, this cursed enemy drives me into loneliness and exile. My
hatred against him is again aroused, and torments and poisons me. I
don't look forward to death now! Shall the hand of an inferior man
crush me? The humiliation for me and the honour for him would be too
great. I will accept the challenge and defend myself. In order to
obtain clear information I go to find a Danish painter, a friend of
Popoffsky, in the Rue de la Santé behind the Val de Grâce. Six weeks
before he had come to Paris, and, although formerly a friend of mine,
had at our first meeting greeted me in almost a hostile way. The next
day, however, he visited me, invited me to his studio, and said so
many kind things to me that I could not help doubting the genuineness
of his friendship. When I asked him about Popoffsky, he answered
evasively, but confirmed the rumour of his being about to come shortly
to Paris.

"In order to murder me," I added.

"Yes; take care!"

On the morning on which I wished to return the Dane's visit, by a
curious chance I found my way barred by an enormous Danish dog, which
reposed in all its hideousness on the ground of the courtyard. For a
moment I hesitated, then I turned back, and on arriving at home thanked
the powers for their warning, for I had certainly escaped some unknown
danger.

Some days afterwards, when I wished to repeat my visit, on the
threshold of the open door there sat a child with a playing-card in its
hand. I glanced at the card superstitiously; it was the ten of spades.
"They are playing an evil game in this house," I said to myself, and
turned back again.

In the evening, after the scene in the restaurant, I was almost
determined to carry out my plan, in spite of dog and card, but fate
willed it otherwise. In the restaurant of the Lilas brewery I met my
man. He was delighted to see me, and we sat down on the terrace. We
recalled our common experiences in Vienna; he seemed to be the same
good friend that he was before, narrated his stories with enthusiasm,
forgot our former small disagreements, and confessed the truth of
some things which he had before publicly denied. Suddenly he appeared
to remember his duty or some promises which he had given; he became
taciturn, cold, hostile, and obviously vexed that he had been betrayed
into disclosing secrets. He answered my direct question whether
Popoffsky was in Paris with a brief "No," which was plainly false, and
we parted.

Here I must remark that the Dane had been Frau Popoffsky's lover before
me, and that from the time she had given him up on my account, he
cherished a grudge against me. Now he played the rôle of family friend
with Popoffsky, who knew nothing of his former relation with his wife.

       *       *       *       *       *

Schumann's _Aufschwung_ sounds over the deep-leaved trees, but the
musician remains invisible and leaves me doubtful as before as to the
exact house in which he lives. For a whole month the music continues
from four to five in the afternoon.

One morning, as I go down the Rue de Fleurs, in order to comfort myself
by looking at my rainbow in the dyer's window, and enter the Jardin de
Luxembourg, which, with all its trees in blossom, is as beautiful as a
fairy-tale, I find on the ground two dry twigs which have been broken
off by the wind. They formed the two Greek letters "p" and "y," the
first and last letters of Popoffsky. He _was_, then, persecuting me,
and the powers wished to guard me against the danger. I felt uneasy in
spite of these signs of grace from the unseen. I invoked the protection
of Providence, I read the imprecatory psalms, I hated my enemy with an
Old Testament hatred, while I lacked the courage to use the black magic
which I had recently studied. "Make haste O God, to deliver me; make
haste to help me, O Lord. Let them be ashamed and confounded that seek
after my soul. Let them be turned back and put to confusion that desire
my hurt. Let them be turned back as a reward of their shame that say,
'Aha! Aha!'"

This prayer seemed to me at that time right, and the mercy inculcated
in the New Testament like cowardice. To what unknown power my
iniquitous prayer found its way I do not know. The sequel of this
narrative will, at any rate, show that it was heard.



EXTRACTS FROM MY JOURNAL

1896

_May_ 13_th_.--A letter from my wife. She has learned from the papers
that a Mr. S. is about to journey to the North Pole in an air-balloon.
She feels in despair about it, confesses to me her unalterable love,
and adjures me to give up this idea, which is tantamount to suicide.
I enlighten her regarding her mistake. It is a cousin of mine who is
risking his life in order to make a great scientific discovery.

_May_ 14_th_.--Last night I had a dream. A head which had been cut off
was set on the trunk of a man who looked like an actor come down in the
world through drink. The head began to speak. I was frightened, and
knocked my bed-screen down while I, as I thought, pushed a policeman
before me to protect me from the madman's attack.

_May_ 17_th and the following days_.--The glass of absinthe at six
o'clock, and the terrace of the Brewery of Lilas behind the statue
of Marshal Ney, are my only remaining sin and delight. There,
after finishing the day's work, when soul and body are exhausted, I
refresh myself with the green drink, a cigarette, the _Temps_, and
the _Débuts_. How sweet is life after all, when the mist of a mild
intoxication casts its veil over the miseries of existence. Probably
the powers envy me this hour of a visionary happiness, for from this
evening onwards it is disturbed by a series of annoyances which cannot
be attributed to chance. On May 17th, I find my place, which has been
reserved for me daily for nearly two years, occupied; all the other
chairs are also taken. Deeply annoyed, I have to go to another café.

_May_ 18_th_.--My old corner in Lilas is again vacant, and I am again
under my chestnut behind the Marshal, feeling contented, even happy. My
well-concocted absinthe is there, my cigarette lighted, and the _Temps_
spread out. Then a drunken man passes; a hateful-looking fellow, whose
mischievous, contemptuous air annoys me. His face is red, his nose
blue, his eyes malicious. I taste my absinthe, and feel happy not to be
like this sot.... There! I don't know how, but my glass is upset and
empty. Without sufficient money to order another, I pay for this and
leave the café. Certainly it was again the Evil One who played me this
trick.

_May_ 19_th_.--I don't venture to go to the café.

_May_ 20_th_.--I have slunk round the terrace of the Lilas, and at last
found my corner unoccupied. One must fight the evil spirits and begin
the war oneself. The absinthe is made, the cigarette glows, and the
_Temps_ has important news. Then (I speak the truth, reader), a chimney
of the café over my head takes fire! There is a universal panic. I
remain sitting, but a stronger will than mine directs a cloud of soot
with such a good aim on me, that two large flakes settle on my glass.
Disconcerted, but as unbelieving and sceptical as ever, I depart.

_June_ 1_st_.--After long abstinence, the longing for my chestnut again
awakes. My table is occupied, and I sit down at a vacant one standing
somewhat apart. Then there comes a middle-class family, and sits near
me. There seems to be no end of them. Women push against my chair,
children do their little businesses before my eyes, young men take away
my matches without asking leave. Thus I sit in the midst of a noisy,
shameless throng, but do not waver nor yield. Then occurs something
which, without any doubt, shows the skilful hand of the unseen, for
there is no room for suspecting these people to whom I am entirely
unknown.

A young man lays with an unmistakable gesture a sou on my table. A
stranger, and alone among a crowd of people, I let it happen, but,
blind with anger, I seek for an explanation.

He gives me a sou, as if to a beggar! Beggar! that is the dagger which
I drive into my breast. Beggar! for thou deservest nothing, and----

The waiter offers me a more comfortable place, and I leave the money
lying. What a disgrace! He brings it after me, and informs me politely
that the young man had found it under my table, and thought it was
mine. I feel ashamed, and in order to calm my anger, order another
absinthe.

The absinthe comes, and I feel quite comfortable, when a pestilential
smell of ammonia almost stifles me. Again a miracle or some evil
purpose! An escape-pipe flows out at the edge of the pavement, exactly
where my seat is. I begin to understand that the good spirits wish
to heal me of a sin, which at last leads to the madhouse. Blessed be
Providence which has saved me!

_May_ 25_th_.--In spite of the regulations of the house which exclude
women, a family has taken up its quarters next my room. For a day and a
night crying babies afford me much pleasure, and remind me of the good
old times when I was between thirty and forty and life was pleasantest.

_May_ 26_th_.--The family quarrel together and the children howl. How
similar it is, and yet how pleasant it is for me--_now_!

_May_ 29th.--A letter from the children of my first marriage informs
that a telegram had come for them bidding them to be present in
Stockholm at the farewell feast which was to celebrate my departure for
the North Pole. They understand nothing about it, and I just as little.
What a fatal error!

_June_ 2_nd_.--In the Avenue de l'Observatoire I find two pebbles
shaped exactly like hearts. In the evening, in the garden of a Russian
painter, I found a third heart of the same size, exactly like the two
others. The playing of Schumann's _Aufschwung_ has ceased, and I am
again calm.

_June_ 9_th_.--I visit the Danish painter in the Rue de la Santé.
The great dog has disappeared; the entrance is free. We go to dine
on a terrace in the Boulevard Port-Royal. My friend is cold and
uncomfortable, and as he has forgotten his overcoat I lay mine over
his shoulders. At first this quiets him; he feels himself dominated by
me, and does not struggle against it. We are agreed on all points;
he does not venture any more to oppose me. He admits that Popoffsky
is a scoundrel, and that all my misfortunes are due to him. Suddenly
a strange fit of nervousness takes hold of him; he trembles like a
medium under the influence of the hypnotiser, gets excited, shakes
off the overcoat, stops eating, lays his fork on one side, stands up
and goes off. What is the meaning of it? Does he feel my coat to be a
Nessus robe? Has my nervous fluid become stored up in it, and through
its opposite polarity subjugated him? Does Ezekiel, chap. xiii., ver.
18, refer to something similar? "Woe to you that sew pillows upon all
armholes, and make kerchiefs for the heads of persons of every stature,
to catch souls.... I will tear your kerchiefs, and I will deliver my
people out of your hand, and they shall no more be in your hand to be
hunted; and ye shall know that I am the Lord."

Have I become a wizard without knowing it?

_June_ 7_th_.--I visited my Danish friend in order to look at his
pictures. When I arrived he seemed well and cheerful, but after half
an hour he had a nervous attack, which increased so much that he had
to undress and go to bed. What was the matter with him? Had he a bad
conscience?

_June_ 14_th, Sunday_.--In the Jardin du Luxembourg I found a fourth
heart-shaped pebble, like the three former ones. The stone has a piece
of gold tinsel adhering to it; altogether it remains a puzzle, but
seems to foreshadow something. I compare the four stones together
before the open window, as the bells of St. Sulpice begin to ring; then
the great bell of Notre-Dame commences, and through these usual sounds,
there comes a heavy solemn peal, as though it issued from the bowels of
the earth. I ask the waiter who brings my letters what it is. He says,
"The great bell of the Church Sacré Cœur of Montmartre."

It is then the festival of the Sacred Heart? And I contemplate these
four hard stone hearts, curiously moved by this striking coincidence.

In the direction of Notre-Dame des Champs I hear a cuckoo, and yet it
is impossible; or have my ears become so extra-sensitive that they can
hear as far as the wood of Meudon?

June 15_th_.--I go to the city to change a cheque into bank-notes
and gold. To my astonishment, the Quai Voltaire sways under my feet;
certainly the Carrousel Bridge trembles under the weight of the carts.
But to-day, this movement continues past the Tuileries to the Avenue
de l'Opéra. There is always vibration in a town, but in order to notice
it one must have very sensitive nerves.

The other side of the river is, for us dwellers in Montparnasse, a
foreign world. It is nearly a year since I visited the Lyons Bank,
or the Café de la Régence. On the Boulevard des Italiens, I felt
homesick, and I hurried back to the river, where the sight of the Rue
des Saints Pères revived me. Near the Church St. Germain des Prés I
met a funeral, and after that, two colossal Madonnas, which were being
carried on a cart. One of them, with folded hands and eyes directed
heavenwards, made a deep impression on me.

_June_ 16_th_.--On the Boulevard St. Michel I bought a paper-weight
adorned with a glass globe containing the Madonna of Lourdes in her
famous grotto; before her kneels a veiled woman. When I place the
figure in the sun, it casts strange shadows. On the back of the grotto
the plaster has accidentally formed a head of Christ, though evidently
unintended by the artist.

_June_ 18_th_.--My Danish friend rushes in, in a state of excitement
and trembling all over, into my room. Popoffsky has been arrested
in Vienna on the charge of having murdered his paramour and two
illegitimate children. After I recover from the first surprise, and my
first feeling of sincere sympathy for a man who at any rate had once
been my intimate friend, a deep peace settles on my spirit, which had
been tortured for months with long-continued threats. Unable to conceal
my real selfishness, I give free vent to my feelings. It is dreadful,
and yet I am relieved when I think of the danger from which I have
escaped.

What was his motive for the crime? We conjecture as a reason the
jealousy which his lawful wife felt against the illegitimate family,
and the expense which they involved. Perhaps also....

"What?"

"Perhaps his bloodthirsty instincts have recently been able to find no
outlet in Paris, and have sought for satisfaction in some other way, no
matter upon whom." To myself I say: "Was it possible that my earnest
prayers had averted the dagger, and turned it against the murderer
himself?" Then, giving up guessing, I conclude magnanimously like a
victor: "Let us at any rate save our friend's literary reputation. I
will write an essay on his merits as an author; you draw a flattering
portrait, and we will send both to the _Revue Blanche_."

In the Dane's studio (the dog guards it no more) we stand and
contemplate a picture of Popoffsky painted two years ago. It represents
only his head, with a cloud below it. Underneath are a pair of
cross-bones like one sees on tombstones. The decapitated head makes us
shudder, and the dream of May 14th steals into my memory like a ghost.
"How did you come to think," I asked, "of representing him with a head
only?"

"That is hard to say; but there seemed to be a fate brooding over
this fine mind, with marks of genius, which dreamed of fame without
being willing to pay the price for it. Life lets us choose one of two
things--the laurel or luxury."

"You have at last discovered that!"

_June_ 23_rd_,--During these last days since the news of the Russian's
arrest, a fresh disquiet seizes me. It appears to me as though someone
somewhere were meddling with my destiny, and I tell the Danish painter
my suspicion that the hate of the imprisoned Russian makes me suffer
like the electric fluid from a dynamo.

There are moments in which I foresee that my stay in Paris will soon
be at an end, and that a revolution in my circumstances is at hand.

The weathercock on the cross of Notre-Dame des Champs seems to me to
flap its wings as though it wished to fly northwards. Anticipating
my speedy departure, I hastily conclude my studies in the Jardin des
Plantes. A zinc bath in which I make experiments in alchemy shows on
its inner sides a landscape formed by the evaporation of iron salts. I
understand it is a presage, but I cannot guess where this landscape is.
Hills covered with forests of firs; lying between them, plains covered
with fruit trees and cornfields; everything indicates the neighbourhood
of a river. One of the hills with precipices of stratified formation is
crowned with the ruins of a stately castle. I cannot make out more, but
I shall not remain long in uncertainty.

June 20th.--We receive an invitation from the head of the scientific
occultists, the editor of the _Initiation_. As the doctor and I arrived
at Marolles en Brie we received three pieces of bad news: A weasel had
killed the ducks; a servant girl was ill; the third I forget.

On the evening of our return to Paris, I read in a paper the famous
history of the haunted house in Valence en Brie. Brie? I begin to
fear that the occupants of my hotel will become suspicious, hear of
my excursion to Brie, and in consequence of my experiments in alchemy
suppose that I have set on foot that humbug or witchcraft.

I have bought myself a rosary. Why? It is pretty, and the evil spirits
fear the Cross; besides, I don't worry any more about the motives
of my actions. I act, as the humour takes me, and life is much more
interesting. There is a sudden change as regards the Popoffsky case.
His friend the Dane begins to doubt his having committed the crime,
and says the accusation against him was refuted at the inquest. The
publishing of my article is put off, and I feel as cold towards him as
before. At the same time the monstrous dog reappears--a hint for me to
be on my guard.

As I am writing in the afternoon at the table near my window, a
thunderstorm bursts. The first drops of rain fall on my manuscript
and blot it in such a way that from the obliterated letters the word
"Alp"[3] is formed, and also a blot in the shape of an enormous face. I
preserve this; it resembles the Japanese god of thunder as portrayed
in the _Atmosphère_ of Camille Flammarion.

June 28_th_.--I have seen my wife in a dream; her front teeth were
missing. She gave me a guitar, which looked like a Danube boat. This
dream threatened me with imprisonment.

In the afternoon I rub together on a piece of paper quicksilver, tin,
sulphur, and chlorate of ammonia. When I took off the mixture, the
paper retained the impression of a face, which had an extraordinary
resemblance to that of my wife in the dream of the past night.

July 1_st_.--I expect an eruption, an earthquake, a thunderbolt
somewhere or other. Nervous as a horse when wolves are near, I scent
danger, and pack my box ready for Hight without being able to decide on
it. The Russian has been liberated from prison for want of proofs; his
friend the Dane has become my enemy. The customers in the restaurant
persecute me. We had our last meal in the courtyard on account of
the heat. The table was placed between the dustbin and the lavatory.
Over the dustbin hung the picture of the crucified woman by my former
American friend. They had revenged themselves so severely upon him
that he had disappeared without paying his debts. Near the table the
Russians have placed a statuette, a warrior with the conventional
scythe, possibly to frighten me! A young fellow belonging to the house
goes behind my back to the lavatory with the thinly concealed purpose
of annoying me. The court is as narrow as a mineshaft, and admits no
sunlight over the high walls. The women who live in the different
storeys make obscene remarks over our heads. Domestic servants come
with their baskets full of rubbish in order to empty them into the
dustbin. It is hell itself! Moreover, my two neighbours, notoriously
immoral characters, try, with their disgusting talk, to entangle me in
a quarrel.

Why am I here? Because loneliness compels me to seek human society and
to hear human voices. Just as my mental suffering reaches its highest
pitch, I discover some pansies blooming in the tiny flower-bed. They
shake their heads as though they wished to warn me of a danger, and one
of them with a child's face and large eyes signals to me, "Go away!" I
rise and pay; as I go out the young fellow mentioned above greets me
with concealed contempt, which irritates me. But I remain quiet.

I feel pity for myself and shame for the others. I forgive the
offenders as though they were demons, who must now fulfil their duty.
Meanwhile, the disfavour of the powers is all too obvious, and I begin
in my room to total up the debit and credit side. Hitherto, and that
was my comfort, I have never been able to bow myself before others,
but now, crushed by the hand of the invisible, I am anxious to own
myself wrong, and fear lays hold upon me when I carefully think over
my behaviour during the last weeks. My conscience exacts my confession
ruthlessly and pitilessly. I had sinned through conceit, through
ὕβρις, the one sin which the gods do not forgive. Encouraged
by the friendship of Dr. Popus, who had praised my experiments, I
imagined that I had solved the riddle of the Sphinx. An imitator of
Orpheus, I assumed it as my rôle to reanimate nature, which had been
done to death by the scientists. Confident of the favour of the powers,
I flattered myself that I was invincible as regards my foes, and forgot
the most ordinary rules of modesty.

This is the right point at which to insert the history of my secret
friend who has played a decisive rôle in my life as mentor, counsellor,
comforter, judge, and, not least, as a reliable helper in various
times of need. As early as 1890 he wrote to me about a book which I
then published. He had found points of contact between my ideas and
those of the theosophists, and wished to hear my opinion of the Occult
Doctrine and the priestess of Isis, Madame Blavatsky. The aggressive
tone of his letter annoyed me, and I did not conceal this annoyance in
my answer. Four years later I published my _Antibarbarus_, and received
at the most critical juncture of my life a second letter from this
unknown friend, in which, in an elevated and almost prophetic style,
he foretold for me a future fraught with suffering and glory. At the
same time he explained to me that he had resumed this correspondence,
because he guessed that I was just now in the throes of a spiritual
crisis in which a word of comfort might be opportune. Finally, he
offered me material aid, which I, jealous of my miserable independence,
declined.

In the autumn of 1895 I resumed the correspondence by offering him my
natural history studies for publication. From that time we kept up the
most intimate and friendly correspondence, with the exception of a
small disagreement which occurred, when he once took upon himself to
instruct me in an insulting way about matters which I knew very well,
and preached to me proudly about my want of modesty. After we had made
it up again, I imparted to him all my observations, and gave him more
of my confidence than was perhaps wise. I confessed to this man, whom
I had never seen, everything, and let him admonish me seriously, for I
regarded him more as an idea than a person; he was for me a messenger
of Providence, my good angel.

Then there occurred between us a strong difference of opinion which
led to very lively discussions, without, however, leading to any
bitterness. As a theosophist, he preached "Karma," _i.e._, an abstract
total of human destinies which balance each other so as to result in
a kind of Nemesis. He was accordingly a champion of the mechanical
view of the universe, a representative of the so-called materialistic
school. To me, on the other hand, the powers had revealed themselves
as concrete, living, individual personalities, who guide the course of
the world and the destinies of men, as self-conscious entities or, as
the theologians say, as "hypostases." The second difference of opinion
was regarding the denying and putting to death of one's own self, which
always seemed to me perfectly foolish, and seems so still.

Everything, _i.e._, the little which I know, goes back to the Ego as
its central point. Not the cultus, indeed, but the culture of this Ego
seems, therefore, the highest and ultimate aim of existence. My final
and constant answer to his objections, therefore, was: "The killing of
the Ego is self-murder."

Moreover, before whom should I bow myself? Before the theosophists?
Never! But before the Eternal, the Powers, Providence, I seek to subdue
my evil propensities daily as much as possible. To combat for the
preservation of my ego, against all influence which a sect or party,
from love of ruling, may bring to bear upon me, _that_ is my duty
enjoined on me by conscience; the guide which the grace of my divine
protector has given me.

Nevertheless, because of the qualities of this unseen friend, whom I
felt drawn to love and admire, I put up with his admonitions when he
often addressed me in a presumptuous way as his inferior. I always
answered him, but did not conceal from him my dislike for theosophy.

Finally, however--it was during the Popoffsky episode,--he assumed
such a domineering tone, and became so intolerable in his tyranny,
that I feared he took me for a fool. He called me "Simon Magus, the
necromancer," and recommended me to take Madame Blavatsky as my
teacher. I wrote back to him that I had no need of the lady, and that
no one had anything to teach me. Thereupon what did he threaten me
with? That he would bring me back to the right path with the aid of
stronger powers than mine. Then I asked him not to meddle with my
destiny, which the hand of Providence had always so well protected and
guided. And in order to further impress upon him my conviction by means
of an example, I related to him the following incident out of my life,
which has been so rich in providential occurrences, premising at the
same time that by relating this very incident I feared lest I should be
challenging Nemesis.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was ten years before this time, during the most stormy period of my
literary life, when I was raging against the feminist movement, which,
with the exception of myself, everyone in Scandinavia supported. The
heat of the conflict hurried me on, so that I so far overstepped the
bounds of propriety that my countrymen considered me mad.

I was just then staying with my wife and the children of my first
marriage in Bavaria, when I received a letter from a friend of my
youth inviting me and my children to stop with him for a year, he
made no mention of my wife. This letter, with its affected style, its
corrections and omissions, seemed to betray some hesitation on the part
of the writer in the choice of the reasons which he alleged for his
invitation. As I suspected some trap, I declined the offer in a few
non-committal polite phrases.

Two years later, after my first divorce, I went to him of my own accord
and found him living on a little island off the coast of the Baltic Sea
as an inspector of customs. His reception of me was friendly, but his
whole manner embarrassed and equivocal, and our conversation was more
like a police examination. After giving a wakeful night's consideration
to the matter, I understood it. This man, whose self-love I had wounded
in one of my novels, in spite of his display of sympathy, was not
really my well-wisher. An absolute tyrant, he wanted to interfere with
my destiny, to tame and subdue me, in order to show me his superiority.

Quite unscrupulous in his choice of means, he tormented me for a week
long, poisoned my mind with slanders and stories invented to suit every
occasion, but did it so clumsily that I was more and more convinced
that he wished to have me incarcerated as a person of unsound mind.

I offered no special resistance, and left it to my good fortune to
liberate me at the right time.

My apparent submission won my executioner's favour, and there alone,
in the midst of the sea, hated by his neighbours and subordinates, he
yielded to his need to confide in someone. He told me, with incredible
frankness for a man of fifty, that his sister during the past winter
had gone out of her mind, and in a fit of frenzy had destroyed all her
savings. The next morning he told me, further, that his brother was in
a lunatic asylum on the mainland.

I asked myself, "Is that why he wants to see me confined in one, in
order to avenge himself on fate?" After he had thus related to me his
misfortunes, I won his complete confidence, so that I was able to leave
the island, and hire a house on a neighbouring one, where my children
joined me. Four weeks later a letter summoned me to my "friend," whom
I found quite broken down because his brother in a fit of mania had
shattered his skull. I comforted my executioner, and his wife whispered
to me with tears that she had long feared lest the same fate should
overtake her husband. A year later the newspapers announced that my
friend's eldest brother had taken his life under circumstances which
seemed to indicate that he was out of his mind. Thus three distinct
blows descended on the head of this man who had wished to play with
lightning.

"What a strange chance!" people will say. And stranger, and more
ominous still, every time that I relate this history, I am punished for
doing so.

       *       *       *       *       *

The fierce July heat broods over the city; life is intolerable, and
everything is malodorous. I expect a catastrophe. In the street I find
a scrap of paper with the word "marten" written on it; in another
street a similar scrap with the word "vulture" written by the same
hand. Popoffsky certainly has a resemblance to a marten as his wife has
to a vulture. Have they come to Paris to kill me? He, the murderer, is
capable of everything after he has murdered wife and children.

The perusal of the delightful book _La joie de mourir_ arouses in me
the wish to quit the world. In order to learn to know the boundary
between life and death, I lie on the bed, uncork the flask containing
cyanide of potassium, and let its poisonous perfume stream out. The man
with the scythe approaches softly and voluptuously, but at the last
moment someone enters or something else happens; either an attendant
enters under some pretext, or a wasp flies in through the window.

The powers deny me the only joy left, and I bow to their will.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the beginning of July the house is empty; the students have gone
for their holidays. All the more is my curiosity aroused by a stranger
who has taken the room on that side of mine where my writing-table is
placed. The Unknown never speaks; he appears to be occupied in writing
on the other side of the wall which divides us. Curiously enough,
whenever I move my chair, he moves his also, and, in general, imitates
all my movements as though he wished to annoy me. Thus it goes on for
three days. On the fourth day I make the following observations: If I
prepare to go to sleep, he also prepares to go to sleep in the next
room; when I lie down in bed, I hear him lie down on the bed by my
wall. I hear him stretch himself out parallel with me; he turns over
the pages of a book, then puts out the lamp, breathes loud, turns
himself on his side, and goes to sleep. He apparently occupies the
rooms on both sides of me, and it is unpleasant to be beset on two
sides at once. Absolutely alone, I take my mid-day meal in my room, and
I eat so little that the waiter pities me. For eight days I have not
heard the sound of my own voice, which begins to grow feeble for want
of exercise. I have n't a sou left, and my tobacco and postage stamps
run out. Then I rally my will power for a last attempt: I _will_ make
gold, by the dry process. I manage to borrow some money and procure the
necessary apparatus: an oven, smelting-saucepans, wood-coals, bellows,
and tongs. The heat is terrific and, like a workman in a smithy, I
sweat before the open fire, stripped to the waist. But sparrows have
built their nests in the chimney, and smoke pours out of it into the
room. I feel like going mad over this first attempt, my head-aches,
and the frustration of my efforts; for everything goes wrong. I have
smelted the mass of metal in the fire and look inside the saucepan.
The borax has formed within it a death's-head with two glowing eyes
which seem to pierce my soul with uncanny irony. Not a grain of gold is
there, and I give up all further effort. I resume my seat, and read the
Bible just where I happen to open it: "None calleth to mind, neither
is there knowledge nor understanding to say, I have burned part of it
in the fire; yea, also, I have baked bread upon the coals thereof, I
have roasted flesh and eaten it; and shall I make the residue thereof
an abomination? Shall I fall down to the stock of a tree? He feedeth on
ashes; a deceived heart hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver
his soul nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand. Thus saith the
Lord, thy Redeemer, and he that formed thee from the womb, I am the
Lord that maketh all things, that stretcheth forth the heavens alone,
that spreadeth forth the earth; who is with me? that frustrateth the
tokens of the liars and maketh diviners mad; that turneth wise men
backward, and maketh their knowledge foolish."

For the first time I despair of my scientific experiments. If they are
all folly, then I have sacrificed my happiness and that of my wife and
children to a phantom. Alas for my delusion! There is a gaping abyss
between my parting from my family and this moment. A year and a half
has elapsed, and so many painful days and nights have been spent for
nothing. But no! it cannot be, it is not so.

Have I lost myself in a dark wood? The good spirit has guided me on
the right way to the island of the blessed, but Satan tempts me. I
am punished again. I sink relaxed on my scat, an unwonted depression
weighs upon my spirits. A magnetic fluid streams from the wall, and
sleep nearly overcomes me. I pull myself together, and stand up, in
order to go out. As I pass through the passage, I hear two voices
whispering in the room adjoining mine. Why are they whispering? In
order that I may not overhear them. I go through the Rue d'Assas to the
Jardin du Luxembourg. I drag myself wearily along, feeling lame from my
loins to my feet, and sink on a seat behind the group of Adam and his
family.

I am poisoned! That is my first thought. And Popoffsky, who has
murdered his wife and children with poisonous gases, is here. He has
copied the famous experiment of Pettenkofer, and discharged a stream of
gas through the wall. What shall I do? Go to the police? No! for if I
can adduce no proofs they will shut me up as a lunatic.

Væ soli! Woe to the solitary, the sparrow upon the housetop! Never
was my misery greater, and I weep like a forsaken child that fears the
dark.

In the evening I dare not remain sitting at my table for fear of a new
attack, and lie on the bed without venturing to go to sleep. The night
comes and my lamp is lit. Then I see outside, on the wall opposite to
my window, the shadow of a human shape, whether a man or a woman, I
cannot say, but it seems to be a woman. When I stand up, to ascertain
which it is, the blind is noisily pulled down; then I hear the Unknown
enter the room, which is near my bed, and all is silent. For three
hours I lie awake with open eyes to which sleep refuses to come; then
a feeling of uneasiness takes possession of me; I am exposed to an
electric current which passes to and fro between the two adjoining
rooms. The nervous tension increases, and, in spite of my resistance, I
cannot remain in bed, so strong is my conviction: "They are murdering
me; I will not let myself be murdered." I go out in order to seek the
attendant in his box at the end of the corridor, but alas! he is not
there. They have got him to go away; he is a silent accomplice, and I
am betrayed!

I go down the stairs, and hasten through the corridors in order to
rouse the director of the _pension_. With a presence of mind, of which
I would not have thought myself capable, I tell him that I have a
sudden attack of indisposition, caused by the evaporations from my
chemicals, and ask for another room for the night. Thanks to a wrathful
Providence, the only vacant room is directly under that of my enemy. I
open the window and inhale full draughts of the fresh air of a starry
night. Above the roofs of the Rue d'Assas, and the Rue de Madame, the
Great Bear and Pole-star are visible. To the North, then! I take the
omen!

As I draw back the curtain of the alcove where my bed is, I hear my
enemy overhead get out of bed and place some heavy object in a box
which he locks. He is concealing something then! Perhaps the electric
machine.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next morning, which is a Sunday, I pack up and give out that I am
going to the seacoast. I tell the coachman to drive to the St. Lazare
Station, but when we get opposite the Odeon, I alter the route and bid
him drive to the Rue de la Clef, near the Jardin des Plantes. I wish
to remain here incognito, in order to complete my studies before my
departure for Sweden.


[1] _L'extériorisation de la sensibilité_.

[2] Famous Norwegian novelist.

[3] Nightmare.




VI

HELL


At length a pause ensues in my sufferings. For hours at a time I sit
in the open space before the summer-house, watch the flowers, and
think over the recent events. The peace of mind, which I find after my
flight, convinces me that I have not been suffering from the delusions
of disease, but have been persecuted by real enemies. I work during
the day and sleep quietly at night. Delivered from the squalor of my
former residence, I feel myself rejuvenated among the roses of this
garden--the favourite flower of my youth. The Jardin des Plantes, this
wonder of Paris unknown to the Parisians themselves, has become my
park. This epitome of creation confined within a narrow circuit, this
Noah's Ark, this Paradise Regained in which I wander without danger
among wild beasts--it is too much happiness. Beginning with stones, I
proceed to the vegetable and animal kingdoms, till I come to man, and
behind man I discover the Creator--the great Artist who develops as
he creates, sets on fool designs which He rejects later on, resumes
plans which have failed, and completes and multiplies primitive forms
endlessly. All is the work of His hand. Often in the discovery of
methods He makes enormous leaps, and then Science comes and ascertains
the extent of the gaps and the missing links, and imagines that it has
found the intermediary forms which have disappeared.

       *       *       *       *       *

As I now consider myself safe from my persecutors, I send my address to
the Pension Orfila in order to resume my correspondence with the outer
world, but no sooner have I lifted the mask of my incognito than my
peace is interrupted. All kinds of things disquiet me, and my former
discomfort returns.

To begin with, articles whose use I cannot understand are being
stored away in the room which adjoins mine on the ground-floor, and
which hitherto was vacant of furniture. An old gentleman, with grey,
malicious eyes, carries empty boxes, strips of metal, and other
mysterious objects into it. At the same time the noises over my head
recommence. They file and hammer as though they were constructing some
infernal machine.

Moreover, the landlady, who at first appeared pleased at my taking
up my abode here, alters her demeanour; she tries to ferret out my
affairs, and vexes me by her manner of greeting me. Besides this, the
lodger who occupies the first floor above me, leaves the house. He was
a quiet old gentleman, whose heavy footfall was familiar to me. In his
place comes a reserved-looking tenant who has lived in the house for
years. He has not changed his lodgings but only his room. Why?

The servant-maid who looks after my room, and brings my meals, has a
serious air and casts sympathetic glances at me.

All at once a wheel begins to turn over my head, and continues to
do so the whole day long. I am condemned to death! That is my firm
conviction. By whom? By the Russians, the Pietists, Catholics, Jesuits,
Theosophists? As what?--A wizard or practiser of black arts? Or perhaps
it is by the police as an anarchist? That is a very plausible pretext
for removing personal enemies.

At the moment that I write this, I do not know what was the real nature
of the events of that July night when death threatened me, but I will
not forget that lesson as long as I live.

If the initiated believe that I was then exposed to a plot woven by
human hands, let me tell them that I feel anger against no one, for
I know now that another stronger Hand, unknown to them, guided those
hands against their will.

On the other hand, if there was no plot, I must suppose that my own
imagination conjured up these chastising spirits for my own punishment.
We shall see in the sequel how far this supposition is probable.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the morning of my last day (as I suppose) I rise in a resigned frame
of mind, which might be called religious; I have no more ties binding
me to life. I have put my papers in order, written necessary letters,
and burnt what had to be burnt. Then I go to bid farewell to the world
in the Jardin des Plantes.

The Swedish block of lodestone before the mineralogical museum gives
me a greeting from my native land. I greet the acacias, the cedars
of Lebanon, and the monuments of great epochs when botany was still
a living science. I buy bread and cherries for my old friends. The
old bear knows me well, for I am the only one who brings him cherries
morning and evening. I give bread to the young elephant, who spits in
my face after he has eaten it--the young, faithless ingrate!

Farewell, ye vultures who had to exchange the sky for a dirty cage!
Farewell, bison and behemoth, thou chained demon! Farewell, ye loving
pair of sea-birds whom wedded love consoles for the loss of ocean
and its wide horizon! Farewell, stones, plants, flowers, trees,
butterflies, birds, snakes, all creatures of a good God! And you great
men, Bernadin de Saint-Pierre, Linnæus, Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, Haüy,
whose names shine in gold on the front of the temple--farewell! but we
meet again. So I part from this earthly Paradise, and Séraphita's noble
words come to my mind, "Adieu, pauvre terre! adieu!"

When I re-enter the hotel garden, I become aware of the presence of
a man, who must have come in my absence. I do not see him, but feel
him. What increases my confusion is the visible alteration which the
adjoining room has undergone. A cloth hung over a rope obviously
conceals something. On the mantelpiece are metal projections isolated
by wooden panels, and on each there lies a photograph album or some
other book, in order to give these diabolical machines, which I am
inclined to think are accumulators, an innocuous appearance. Moreover,
on a roof in the Rue Censier, exactly opposite my summer-house, I see
two workmen. I cannot make out what they are doing, but they seem to
have an eye on my glass-door and are busy with objects which I cannot
distinguish.

Why do I not escape? Because I am too proud, and must bear the
inevitable. I therefore prepare myself for the night. I take a bath,
and am especially careful to wash my feet, for my mother has told me
when a child, that there is something disgraceful in dirty feet. I
shave and perfume myself, and put on the underclothes which I bought
three years ago in Vienna for my wedding--the toilet of a man condemned
to die. I read the psalms in the Bible in which David invokes the wrath
of the Eternal upon his enemies. I do not read the penitential psalms.
I have no right to remorse, for it is not I who have guided my destiny.
I have never requited evil with evil, except when I had to defend
myself. To be remorseful is to criticise Providence, which imposes sin
on us as a suffering, in order to purify us through the disgust with
which each evil deed inspires us.

The summing up of my reckoning with life is as follows: If I have
sinned, on my word of honour, I have been sufficiently punished. That
is certain. As to the fear of hell, I have wandered through a thousand
hells, without trembling, and have experienced enough of them to feel
an intense desire to depart from the vanities and false joys of this
world, which I always despised. Born with a heavenly homesickness,
I wept as a child over the filthiness of life, and felt strange and
homeless among relations and friends. From childhood onwards I have
sought for God and found the Devil. I have borne the cross of Christ in
my youth, and have denied a God who delights to reign over slaves who
love their tormentor.

       *       *       *       *       *

As I let down the curtains of my glass-door, I see a number of ladies
and gentlemen sitting at their champagne in the private drawing-room.
They seem to be strangers just arrived this evening. But they are not a
merry company; their faces are all serious, they discuss, seem to form
plans, and speak in an undertone with each other, as though it were a
conspiracy. To intensify my mental torture, they turn round on their
chairs, and point with their fingers in the direction of my room. About
ten o'clock I extinguish my lamp, and go to sleep quietly, resigned as
a dying man.

I wake up. A clock strikes two; a door is fastened, and--I am out of
bed, as though someone had applied an air-pump to my heart and drawn
me out _so_. At the same time an electric stream strikes my neck, and
presses me to the ground. I rise again, seize my clothes and rush, my
heart beating violently, into the garden. When I have dressed myself,
my first clear thought is to go to the police and have the house
searched. But the front door is shut, and so is the porter's box. I
grope my way on, open a door on the right, and step into the kitchen,
in which a lamp is burning. I upset it, and stand in pitch darkness.

Fear restores me to my senses, and I return to my room with the
thought: "If I make a mistake, I am lost." I drag a chair out into
the garden, and, sitting under the starry sky, I reflect on what is
happening. Am I ill? Impossible: for until I disclosed my incognito, I
was quite well. Is it an attack? Yes, because I saw the preparations
for it going on. For the rest, I feel better here outside in the
garden beyond the power of my enemies, and my heart beats quite
regularly. While reflecting thus, I hear someone cough in the room
adjoining mine. It is at once answered by a low cough from the room on
the other side. Doubtless it is a signal, just like the one I heard my
last night in the Pension Orfila. I try to open forcibly the glass-door
of the ground-floor room, but the bolt holds.

Wearied by the useless fight against invisible powers, I sink on
a garden seat. Sleep has pity on me, so that under the stars of a
beautiful summer night I fall asleep among the roses whispering in the
warm airs of July.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sun awakes me, and I thank Providence which has saved me from
death. I pack my things, and mean to go to Dieppe to find shelter with
some friends, whom I have neglected as I have all others, but who are
considerate and generous towards the fallen and shipwrecked. When I ask
to speak to the directress of the house, she is not visible, and sends
a message to say she is unwell. I might have expected that she would be
involved in the plot against me. I leave the house with a curse on the
head of my knavish enemies, and call on heaven to send down fire on
this den of robbers--whether rightly or wrongly, who knows? My Dieppe
friends were alarmed, when they saw me mounting the hill of their town
with my bag heavy with manuscripts.

"Where have you come from, poor fellow?"

"I come from death."

"I doubt it, for you look as if you had not been dug out yet."

The kind, good-hearted lady of the house takes me by the hand and leads
me before a looking-glass, that I may see myself. I certainly look a
pitiable object; my face blackened by smoke from the engine, my cheeks
fallen in, my hair grown grey, my eyes staring wildly, and my linen
dirty.

But when I was left alone in the dressing-room by my kind hostess,
who treated me like a sick, deserted child, I examined my face more
closely. There was an expression in my features which alarmed me.
It was not fear of death or wickedness, but something else, and had
I at that time known Swedenborg, he would have explained to me the
impression made by the evil spirit on my soul, and the occurrences
of the last weeks. Now I felt ashamed and angry with myself, and my
conscience pained me on account of my ingratitude towards this family,
which had proved a harbour of refuge for me, as for so many other
shipwrecked voyagers. As a punishment, I shall be driven hence also
by the furies. Here is a beautiful artistic home, ordered domestic
economy, married happiness, with charming children, cleanness and
comfort, boundless hospitality, charitable judgment, an atmosphere of
beauty and goodness which dazzles me--a paradise, in short, and I in
the midst of it, all like a lost soul. I see spread out before my eyes
all the happiness which life can offer, and all that I have lost.

       *       *       *       *       *

I occupy an attic room looking out on a hill where there is an asylum
for old people. In the evening I observe two men looking over the wall
of the institution towards our villa, and pointing at my window. The
idea that I am being persecuted by means of electricity again takes
possession of me.

The night between the 25th and 26th of July, 1896, comes on. We have
searched together all the attic rooms near mine, and the loft itself,
so as to satisfy me that no one with evil intentions could be lurking
there. Only in a lumber-room an object of no significance in itself has
a depressing effect upon me. It is only the skin of a polar bear used
as a rug; but the gaping jaws, the threatening teeth, I lie sparkling
eyes irritate me. Why should this creature lie just now, just there?
Without taking off my clothes, I lie down on the bed, determined to
wait for the fateful hour--two o'clock.

While I am reading, midnight approaches. One o'clock strikes, and
the whole house is wrapped in slumber. At last two o'clock strikes!
Nothing happens. Then in a dare-devil spirit, or perhaps only with the
intention of making a physical experiment, I rise, open both windows,
and light two candles. Then I sit at the table behind them, expose
myself with bared breast as a mark, and challenge the unknown: "Attack,
if you dare!"

Then I feel, at first only faintly, something like an inrush of
electric fluid. I look at my compass, but it shows no sign of wavering.
It is not electricity then. But the tension increases; my heart beats
violently; I offer resistance, but as if by a flash of lightning my
body is charged with a fluid which chokes me and depletes my blood. I
rush down the stairs to the room on the ground-floor, where they have
made up for me a provisional bed in case of necessity. There I lie for
five minutes and collect my thoughts. Is it radiating electricity?
No; for the compass has not been affected. Is it a diseased state of
mind induced by fear of the fatal hour of two o'clock? No; for I have
still the courage to defy attacks, but why must I light the candles
and attract the mysterious fluid? In this labyrinth of questioning I
find no answer, and try at last to go to sleep, but a new discharge
of electricity strikes me like a cyclone, forces me to rise from bed,
and the chase begins afresh. I hide myself behind the walls, lie down
close to the doors, or in front of the stove. Everywhere, everywhere
the furies find me. Overmastered by terror, I fly in panic from
everything and nothing, from room to room, and finish by crouching
down on the balcony. The grey-yellow light of dawn begins to break,
the sepia-coloured clouds assume fantastic and monstrous shapes, which
increase my despair. I repair to my friend's studio, lie down on the
carpet, and close my eyes. After barely five minutes' quiet, a rustle
awakes me. A mouse looks at me and seems to wish to come nearer. I
drive it away; it comes back with another one. Good Heavens! Have I
got delirium tremens, though I have been quite temperate the last
three years? (In the daytime I find that there are really mice in the
studio. It was a coincidence, then, but who caused it, and what is his
object?) I change my place, and lie down on the hall carpet. Merciful
sleep descends upon my tortured spirit, and for about half an hour I
lose consciousness of my sufferings. Then a distinct cry "Alp!" makes
me suddenly start up. "Alp!" That is the German for nightmare. "Alp"
is the word which the rainstorm caused to be formed on my paper in
the Hôtel Orfila. Who uttered that cry? No one, for the whole house
is asleep. Is it a devil's game? That is a poetical expression which
perhaps contains the whole truth.

I mount the steps to my attic. The candles have burnt to their sockets;
deep silence reigns. The Angelus rings out. It is the day of the Lord.
I open my breviary and read "De Profundis clamavi ad Te, Domine!" That
comforts me, and I sink down on the bed like a corpse.

_July_ 26_th, Sunday_.--A cyclone devastates the Jardin des Plantes.
The papers contain items which I find especially interesting. To-day,
Andrée's balloon is to ascend for its voyage to the North Pole, but
the occasion is not propitious. The storm has hurled down several
balloons, which have ascended at various points, and killed many
aeronauts.

The next morning I leave Dieppe, uttering a benediction on the house,
over whose well-deserved happiness my sadness had cast a shadow.

Since I do not wish to believe in the interference of supernatural
powers, I imagine that I am the victim of a nervous illness.
Accordingly, I make up my mind to go to Sweden and see a physician who
is a friend of mine.

As a memorial of Dieppe, I take a piece of iron-ore which has a
trefoil shape like a Gothic window, and is marked with the sign of
a Maltese cross. A child has found it on the shore, and tells me
that these stones fall from the sky and are cast by the waves on the
land. I believe him willingly, and keep the gift as a talisman, the
significance of which is hidden from me. (On the coast of Brittany
the coast-dwellers are accustomed after storms to collect stones
shaped like crosses, with a gold-like shimmer. These stones are called
"staurolites.")

       *       *       *       *       *

The little town to which I now betook myself lies in the extreme south
of Sweden, on the seacoast. It is an old pirates' and smugglers'
haunt, in which exotic traces of all parts of the world have been
left by various voyagers. My doctor's house looks like a Buddhist
cloister. The four wings of the one-storeyed house form a quadrangle,
in the centre of which the dome-shaped wood-shed resembles the tomb of
Tamerlane at Samarcand. The style of which the roof is built and faced
with Chinese bricks recalls the Farther East. An apathetic tortoise
crawls over the pavement and disappears in a Nirvana of innumerable
weeds. In the garden is a pagoda-shaped summer-house completely
overgrown by clematis.

In the whole of this cloister, with its countless rooms, there lives
only one person, the director of the district hospital. He is a
widower, solitary and independent, and from the hard discipline of life
has derived that strong and noble contempt of men which leads to a deep
knowledge of the vanity of all things, oneself included.

The entrance of this man into my life occurred in such an unexpected
manner, that I am inclined to assign it to the dramatic skill of a
_Deus ex machina_.

At our first greeting, on my arrival from Dieppe, he looks at me
inquiringly, and suddenly asks, "You have a nervous illness! Good! But
that is not all. You look so strange that I do not recognise you. What
have you been after? Dissipation, crime, lost illusions, religion? Tell
me, old fellow!"

But I tell him nothing special, for my first thought is one of
suspicion. He is prejudiced against me, has made inquiries about me
in some quarter, and wants to have me confined. I tell him about my
sleeplessness, nervousness, and bad dreams, and then we talk of other
things.

In my room my attention is arrested by the American bed, with its four
legs topped by four brass balls, which look like the conductors of an
electric machine. Add to this an elastic mattress with copper springs,
resembling Ruhmkorff induction coils, and one can easily imagine my
rage at this diabolical coincidence. Besides, it is impossible to ask
for another bed, as I might be suspected of being mad. In order to
assure myself that nothing is concealed above me, I mount into the loft
overhead. There is only one object there, but it drives me almost to
desperation. An enormous wire-net rolled together stands immediately
over my bed. One could not wish for a better accumulator. If there is a
thunderstorm, such as is frequent here, the wire network will attract
the lightning, and I shall be lying on the conductor. But I do not
venture to say a word.

The first thing that disturbs me is the noise of a machine. Since I
have quitted the Hôtel Orfila I have a roaring in my ears like the
sound of a water-wheel. Doubting the objective existence of this noise,
I ask the cause of it, and learn that it is the printing-press close
by. The explanation is plausible, and, though little satisfied, I do
not wish to excite myself.

The dreaded night comes on. The sky is covered with clouds; the air is
close; we expect a thunderstorm. I do not venture to lie down to sleep,
and write letters for two hours. At last, overcome with weariness, I
undress myself and creep into bed. The lamp is extinguished; a terrible
stillness reigns in the house. I feel that someone is watching me in
the darkness, touches me and feels for my heart in order to suck my
blood. Without waiting any longer, I spring out of bed, fling open
the window and jump into the courtyard--but I have forgotten the
rose-bushes, whose sharp thorns pierce me through my night-shirt.
Scratched and streaming with blood, I grope about the courtyard.
Gravel-stones, thistles, and nettles lacerate my feet; unknown objects
trip me up. At last I reach the kitchen, which adjoins the doctor's
sitting-room. I knock. No answer. Suddenly I discover that it is
raining all the time. O misery of miseries! What have I done to deserve
these tortures? It is hell. Miserere! Miserere!

I knock repeatedly. It is strange that no one is at hand when I am
attacked. Always this solitude! Does it not point to a plot against me
in which all are implicated?

At last I hear the doctor's voice, "Who is there?"

"It is I: I am ill. Open, or I die!"

He opens the door. "What is the matter?"

I begin my report by giving an account of the attack in the Rue de
la Clef, which I ascribe to enemies, who persecute me by means of
electricity.

"Stop, unhappy man! Your mind is affected!"

"The devil it is! Test my intelligence; read what I write daily and
what is printed----"

"Stop! not a word to anyone! These stories of electricity are frequent
in asylum reports."

"All the better! I care so little for your asylum reports that in order
to clear the matter up, I am willing to be examined to-morrow in the
asylum at Lund."

"Then you are lost! Not a word more now! Lie down and sleep."

I refuse to do so, and insist on his hearing me; he refuses to listen.

When I am alone, I ask myself, "Is it possible that my friend, an
honourable man, who has always kept aloof from dirty transactions, at
the close of a blameless career should succumb to temptation? But who
has tempted him?" I have no answer to this question, but many surmises.
"Every man has his price," says the proverb, but a large sum must
have been necessary to bribe this strong character. But one does not
pay very highly for an ordinary piece of revenge. Therefore he must
have a strong interest in the matter himself. Stop! I have it! I have
made gold; the doctor has half-accomplished it also, although, when
asked, he denies having repeated the experiments regarding which I had
corresponded with him. He denies it, and yet as I stepped across the
pavement of the courtyard last evening I found proofs that he had been
experimenting. Therefore he is lying. Moreover, in conversation the
same evening, he enlarged on the sad consequences which the possible
manufacture of gold would entail upon mankind. Universal bankruptcy,
universal confusion, anarchy, ruin. "One would have to kill the
discoverer of the process," he concluded.

Moreover, I know the fairly modest private means of my friend. I am
astonished to hear him speak of his intended purchase of the ground on
which his dwelling stands. He is in debt, must even economise, and yet
means to be a landowner. Everything combines to render me suspicious of
my good friend.

Grant that I am suffering from persecution-mania, but what smith forges
the links of these hellish syllogisms?

"The discoverer would have to be killed." This is the thought with
which my mental torment subsides into sleep about the time of sunrise.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have commenced a cold-water cure. I have changed my room, and have
fairly quiet nights now, although not without relapses.

One evening the doctor sees the breviary lying on my table, and becomes
angry and excited. "Always this religion! That is also a symptom, don't
you know?"

"Or a necessity like other necessities!"

"Enough! I am no atheist, but I think the Almighty does not wish to be
addressed in such intimate terms as formerly. These flatteries of the
Deity belong to the past, and personally I agree with the Mohammedans,
who only ask for the gift of resignation in order to support the burden
Destiny imposes upon them with dignity."

Significant words, from which I extract some grains of gold for myself.
He carries away my breviary and Bible, and says: "Read indifferent
matters of secondary interest, world histories, or mythologies, and
leave idle dreaming. Above all things, beware of occultism, that
caricature of science. It is forbidden to us to spy out the Creator's
secrets, and woe to them who seek to do so!"

On my objecting that the occultists in Paris form a whole body by
themselves, he only says, "All the worse for them." In the evening he
brings me, without any ulterior purpose, I am sure, Victor Rydberg's
_German Mythology_.

"Here is something to send you to sleep, standing. It is better than
sulphonal."

If my good friend had known what a spark he was throwing into a keg of
powder, he would rather----

The _Mythology_ which he put into my hands is in two volumes, has
altogether a thousand pages, and opens, so to speak, of itself. My eyes
are arrested by the following lines which are imprinted in letters of
fire on my memory:--"As the legend relates, Bhrign, having out-grown
his father's teaching, became so conceited, that he believed he could
surpass his teacher. The latter sent him into the underworld where, in
order to humble him, he had to witness countless terrible things, of
which he had never had a conception."

That means: "My conceit, my pride, my ὕβρις, has been
punished by my father and teacher. And I am in hell, driven thither by
the powers. And who is my teacher? Swedenborg."

I turn over more leaves of this wonderful book: "One may compare with
this the German myth of the fields of thorns which tear the feet of the
unrighteous."

Enough! Enough! Thorns, too! That is too much! No doubt of it--I am in
hell! And in fact, real occurrences support this idea so powerfully,
that I must at last believe it.

The doctor seems to me to be struggling with conflicting emotions. At
one time he seems prejudiced against me, looks at me contemptiously,
and treats me with humiliating rudeness; at another he seems himself
unhappy, and soothes and comforts me as though I were a sick child. But
then, again, it seems to give him pleasure to be able to trample under
his feet a man of worth for whom he has formerly had a high regard.
Then he lectures me like a pitiless tormentor. I am to work, but not
to give way to exaggerated ambition; I am to fulfil my duties to my
fatherland and family: "Leave chemical speculations alone," he says;
"they are a chimera. There are so many specialists, authorities, and
professional scientists well versed in their own branches."

One day he proposes to me to write for the newest Stockholm society
paper. A fine idea, indeed! I answer him that I do not require to
write for the newest Stockholm paper, since the leading paper of Paris
and of the whole world has accepted my manuscripts. Then he plays the
incredulous, and treats me as a braggart, although he has read my
articles in the _Figaro_, and has himself translated my first one in
_Gil Blas_.

I am not angry with him; he only plays the rôle assigned to him by
Providence. I forcibly suppress the growing hatred which I feel
towards this unexpected tormentor, and curse the fate which changes
what might have been thankfulness towards a generous friend into
unnatural ingratitude.

       *       *       *       *       *

Trifling occurrences ceaselessly arouse my suspicions regarding the
doctor's evil intentions. To-day he has deposited in the garden
verandah an entirely new set of axes, saws, and hammers. What does
he want with them? In his sleeping-room are two guns and a revolver,
and in a corridor a collection of axes which are much too heavy for
merely domestic purposes. What a Satanic coincidence that I should have
these implements of execution and torture before my eyes! For I cannot
explain to myself what they mean, and why they are there. My nights now
pass fairly quietly, while the doctor has taken to roaming about at
night. Once at midnight I am startled by the sudden report of a gun.
Out of politeness I pretend not to have heard it. The next morning he
explains that a covey of woodpeckers had flown into the garden and
disturbed his sleep. Another time, at two o'clock at night, I hear the
hoarse voice of the house-keeper, and on another occasion I hear the
doctor sigh and groan and invoke "the Lord." Is this house haunted?
Who has brought me here?

I cannot suppress a smile when I see how the nightmare with which I
have been oppressed now takes possession of my gaoler. But my malicious
joy is promptly punished. I have a terrible nervous attack. My heart
seems to stop beating, and I hear two words, which I have noted in my
diary. An unknown voice calls out, "Luthardt: Druggist." Druggist! Are
they slowly poisoning me with alkaloids such as hyoscyamin, hashish,
digitalis, and stramonin, which cause delirium?

I don't know, but from that time my suspicion is doubled. They do not
dare to murder me, but they are trying to drive me mad by artificial
means, in order to make me disappear in an asylum. Appearances are
stronger and stronger against the doctor. I find out that he has
discovered my process of making gold, and that perhaps he knew it
before I did. Everything which he says contradicts itself the next
moment, and when confronted by a liar my imagination takes the bit
between its teeth and rushes beyond all reasonable bounds.

On the morning of the 8th of August I go for a walk before the town. On
the high road a telegraph post is humming: I step up to it, lay my ear
on it, and listen as if bewitched. At the foot of the post there lies
by chance a horse-shoe. I pick it up and carry it away as an omen of
good luck.

_August_ 10_th_.--The behaviour of the doctor during the last few
days has disquieted me more than ever. By his strange aspect I see
that he has struggled with himself; his face is pale; his eyes seem
dead. During the whole day he sings or whistles; a letter which he has
received has excited him much.

In the afternoon he comes home with bloody hands from an operation, and
brings a two months' old fœtus with him. He looks like a butcher,
and talks in a hateful way: "Let them kill the weak, and protect the
strong! Down with pity, for it degrades men." I hear him with alarm,
and secretly watch him, after we have wished each other good-night on
the threshold which divides our rooms. First of all, he goes in the
garden, but I cannot hear what he does. Then he steps into the verandah
adjoining my sleeping-room and stops there. He busies himself with some
fairly heavy object, and winds up a piece of clock-work which, however,
belongs to no clock. Half-undressed, I await, standing motionless, the
result of these mysterious preparations.

Then once more the well-known electric fluid streams through the
wall on my bed, seeks my breast, and under it, my heart. The tension
increases: I seize my clothes, slip through the window, and do not
dress till I am outside the house. There I am again in the street, on
the pavement, my last refuge and only friend behind me! I wander onward
without a definite aim; but when I come to myself I go direct to the
chief physician of the town. I have to ring and wait, and prepare what
to say so as not to injure my friend.

At last the doctor appears. I excuse myself for paying such an
untimely visit on the plea of sleeplessness, palpitations, and want of
confidence in my own doctor, who, I said, treated me as a hypochondriac
and would not listen to me. The doctor invites me inside, as though he
had been expecting me, asks me to take a seat, and offers me a cigar
and a glass of wine. I breathe freely at finding myself once more
treated as a respectable man, and not a wretched idiot. We chat for two
hours, and the doctor turns out to be a theosophist to whom I can tell
everything, without compromising myself. At last about midnight I rise
in order to find an hotel; the doctor, however, advises me to return
home.

"Never! he is capable of murdering me!"

"But if I accompany you?"

"Then, indeed, we should meet the enemy's fire together. But he would
never forgive me!"

"All the same, let us venture."

So I return to the house. The door is shut, and I knock. When my friend
enters after a minute, it is I who am seized with compassion, he, the
surgeon, who is accustomed to witness suffering without emotion, he,
the advocate of deliberate murder, is an object of pity indeed. He
is pale as death, trembles, stammers, and at the sight of the doctor
standing behind me seems on the point of collapse, so that I feel more
panic-struck than ever. Is it conceivable that this man intended a
murder and now feared detection? No, it is not; I reject the thought;
it is wicked. After insignificant and on my part really ridiculous
remarks, we go to our bedrooms.

       *       *       *       *       *

There occur in life such terrible incidents that the mind refuses to
retain the memory of them for a moment, but the impression remains and
becomes irresistibly alive again. Thus there comes to my mind something
which took place in the doctor's waiting-room during my night visit.
He went to fetch wine; left alone I contemplated a cupboard with carved
panels of walnut or alderwood, I forget which. As usual, the veins in
the wood formed figures in my imagination. Among them I saw in lively
presentment a head with a goat's beard, and immediately turned my back
upon it. It was Pan in person, as depicted by the ancients and as
metamorphosed later into the Devil of the Middle Ages. I content myself
by noting the fact; the owner of the cupboard, the doctor, would be
doing occult sciences a great service if he would allow the panel to be
photographed. In the _Initiation_ for November, 1896, Dr. Marc Haven
has treated of this phenomenon, which is common in all the kingdoms of
nature, and I recommend the reader to regard attentively the face on
the shell of the tortoise.

       *       *       *       *       *

After this adventure, open hostility breaks out between my friend and
me. He gives me to understand that I am an idler, and that my presence
is superfluous. To this I rejoin that I must wait for the arrival of
important letters, but that I am ready at any time to go to an hotel.
He now plays the rôle of the injured party. As a matter of fact, I
cannot leave for want of money. For the rest, I anticipate that a
turning-point in my destiny is at hand. My health is now restored
again; I sleep quietly and work diligently. The wrath of Providence
seems to have spent itself, for my exertions are crowned with success
in all quarters. If I take a book at haphazard out of the doctor's
library, it always gives the explanation I was looking for. Thus I find
in an old chemical treatise the secret of my process for making gold,
and I can now prove by metallurgic calculations and analogies that I
have made gold, and that gold has always been obtained when one has
gone to work in the same way. An essay on matter which I have written
and sent to a French review is immediately published. I show the
article to the doctor, who betrays his annoyance, since he cannot deny
the fact. Then I say to myself, "How can that man be my friend, who is
vexed at my _success_?"

_August_ 12_th_.--I buy an album at the book-shop. It is a kind
of note-book with a gilt leather cover. The design on it attracts
my attention, and constitutes, strange as it may sound, a kind of
prophecy, the interpretation of which will appear in the sequel. It
is as follows: On the left is the waxing moon in the first quarter,
surrounded by a branch in blossom; three horses' heads (trijugum)
project from the moon; above is a branch of laurel; beneath three
pillars; on the right hand, a bell out of which flowers appear; a wheel
like a sun, etc.

_August_ 13_th_.--The day announced by the clock on the Boulevard St.
Michel has arrived. I wait for something to happen, but in vain; none
the less. I am certain that somewhere something is happening, the
result of which I shall hear in a short time.

_August_ 14_th_.--On the street I pick up a leaf out of an old office
calendar; in large type there is printed on it "August 13th" (the same
date which was on the clock). Underneath in smaller type is a sentence,
"Do nothing secretly which thou canst not do also openly."

_August_ 15_th_.--A letter from my wife. She bewails my lot; she still
loves me, and with our child is waiting for a change in the melancholy
situation. Her parents, who formerly hated me, are full of sympathy
for my sufferings, and what is more, they invite me to visit my little
angel of a daughter, who lives with her grandparents in the country.
That calls me back to life. My child, my daughter is more than my wife.
Only to think of embracing the harmless, innocent creature, whom I
wished to injure,[1] to ask her forgiveness, to brighten her life by
little paternal attentions, after having longed for years to show the
love which has been repressed! I live again, wake up as if out of a
long bad dream, and revere the stern will of the Lord, whose hard but
wise hand has smitten me. "Blessed is he whom God chastens." Blessed,
for he does not trouble about others.

While it is still uncertain whether I shall meet my wife on the Danube,
a matter to which, because of an undefined grudge against her, I am
quite indifferent, I prepare for my pilgrimage, perfectly aware that it
is a penance, and that new mortifications await me.

After thirty days of misery, at last the doors of my torture-chamber
open. I part from my friend--my executioner--without bitterness. He has
only been the scourge in the hand of Providence. Behold, blessed is the
man whom the Lord chasteneth.

[1] See above, page 38.




VII

BEATRICE


In Berlin, I drive from the Stettin to the Anhalt Station. The
half-hour's drive becomes a real way of thorns for me, so many are
the memories which painfully revive in me. At first we pass through
the street in which my friend Popoffsky, as an unknown, but yet
misunderstood, man fought his first battles with poverty and passion.
Now his wife and child are both dead; they died in this house on the
left; and our friendship has turned into bitter hatred.

Here, on the right, are the restaurants frequented by artists and
authors, the scenes of so many intellectual and erotic orgies. Here is
the Cantina Italiana, where I used to meet with my fiancée three years
ago, and where the first honorarium I received from Italy was spent in
Chianti. There is the Schiffbauerdamm with the Pension Fulda, which we
lived in when a young married pair. Here is my theatre, my book-seller,
my tailor, my chemist.

What unhappy instinct leads the cabman to drive me through this _via
dolorosa_ full of buried memories, which at this late hour of the night
rise again like ghosts? Why does he choose just the street in which
is the restaurant, the "Black Pig," well known as a favourite resort
of Heine and E.T.A. Hoffmann? The restaurant keeper himself stands
on the steps under the grotesque sign-board. He looks at me without
recognition. For a second the candelabrum within darts coloured rays
through the numerous bottles in the window, and makes me live again a
year of my life which abounded in grief and joy, friendship and love.
At the same time, I feel keenly that it is all over, and must be buried
to make place for something new.

I spent the night in Berlin. The next morning a deep rose-red flush in
the East greeted me over the roofs. I remember having seen this rosy
colour in Malmö on the evening of my departure. I leave Berlin, my
second home, where I have spent my "second spring," that is, my last.
At the Anhalt Station, full of these memories, I give up all hope of
the renewal of a spring and a love which can never return.

After a night in Tabor, whither the rosy glow followed me, I travel
through the Bohemian mountains to the Danube. There the railway ends,
and I traverse the Danube plain, which extends to Grein, in a carriage.
We pass between orchards of apple and pear trees, cornfields and green
meadows. At last, on a hill on the other side of the river, I discover
the little church in which I never was, but which I know well as the
central point of the landscape which extends before the house where my
child was born. It is now two years since that unforgettable month of
May. I pass through villages and convents; along the road there rise
innumerable penitential chapels, hills crowned with crucifixes, votive
pictures, monuments, reminding one of accidents and sudden deaths
by lightning, and in other ways. At the end of my pilgrimage there
certainly await me the twelve stations of the Cross. Every hundred
paces the Crucified meets me with His crown of thorns, and instils into
me courage to bear scourging and crucifixion. I painfully convince
myself beforehand, that _she_, as I might have known, will not be there.
Now, since my wife can no more divert the domestic storm, I must
expect tit-for-tat from the old parents, whom I left under unpleasant
circumstances, though against my will. I come accordingly for the sake
of peace to be punished, and when I have passed the last village and
the last crucifix, my feelings are something like those of a condemned
man awaiting execution.

       *       *       *       *       *

I had left an infant six weeks old, and I found a little girl of two
and a half. She turned on me a searching look, but not one of dislike,
as though she wished to find out whether I had come for her own or her
mother's sake. After she had assured herself of the former, she let
herself be embraced, and put her little arms round my neck. I am in a
mood like Faust's when he exclaims, "the earth has me again," but more
tender and purer. I am delighted in taking the little one on my arm,
and feeling her heart beat against mine. Love for a child turns a man
into a woman; it is sexless and heavenly, as Swedenborg says. This
is the beginning of my education for heaven. But I have not yet done
penance enough.

Briefly put, the situation is as follows: My wife is staying with her
married sister, for her grandmother, who is in possession of the family
property, has vowed that our marriage shall be dissolved, so intensely
does she hate me, on account of my ingratitude and other matters.
So I with my child remain as a welcome guest of my mother-in-law,
and contentedly accept the hospitality offered me, under present
circumstances, for an indefinite time. My mother-in-law, with the
placable and submissive mind of a deeply religious woman, has forgiven
me all.

_September_ 1_st_.--I occupy the room in which my wife has spent her
two years of separation. Here she has suffered, while I suffered in
Paris. Poor, poor woman! Are we so severely punished, because we have
trifled with love?

During the evening meal the following incident happens. In order to
help my little daughter, who cannot yet help herself, I touch her hand
quite gently and kindly. The child utters a cry, draws her hand back,
and casts at me a glance full of alarm. When her grandmother asks what
is the matter, she answers, "He hurts me." In my confusion I am unable
to utter a word. How many persons have I deliberately hurt, and hurt
still, though without intending it. At night I dream of an eagle which
tears at my hand for some unknown crime.

In the morning my daughter visits me; her manner is gentle and coaxing.
She drinks coffee with me, and remains standing by my writing-table
while I show her pictures. We are already good friends, and my
mother-in-law is glad that she has someone to help her in educating the
little one. In the evening I accompany her going to bed, and hear her
prayers. She is a Catholic, and when she bids me pray and make the sign
of the cross, I remain silent, for I am a Protestant.

_September_ 2_nd_.--Everything is in confusion. My mother-in-law's
mother, who lives not far from here on the bank of the stream, intends
to have an expulsion order made out against me. She wants me to go
at once, and threatens if I disobey to disinherit her daughter. My
mother-in-law's sister, a good woman, who is separated from her
husband, invites me to stay with her in the neighbouring village till
the storm has blown over. She comes herself to fetch me. From the top
of a hill about a mile off, one looks into a circular valley, like the
crater of a volcano, out of which rise many smaller hills covered with
pines. In the middle of this crater lies the village with its church,
and above, on a precipitous height, a castle built in the mediæval
style; between, lie fields and meadows watered by a stream which rushes
into a ravine below the castle.

This peculiar and unique landscape makes a strange impression on me,
and the thought arises: "I must have seen it somewhere before, but
where, where?"

In the zinc bath in the Hôtel Orfila, traced out in oxide of iron!
Without question, it is the same landscape!

My aunt goes down with me into the village, where she owns a
three-storeyed house. The capacious edifice also contains a baker's and
butcher's shop, and a restaurant. It has a lightning-conductor, because
the store was a year ago struck by lightning. When my good aunt, who is
as rigidly religious as her sister, conducts me to the room assigned
for my use, I remain fixed on the threshold as if arrested by a vision.
The walls are painted a rose-colour, which reminds me of the flush of
the dawns which accompanied me on my journey. The curtains are also
rose-coloured, and the windows so full of flowers that the daylight is
subdued by them. Everything is spotlessly clean, and the bed with its
canopy supported by four pillars is like that of a maiden. The whole
room with its appurtenances is a poem, and speaks of a soul which only
half lives upon earth. The Crucified is not there, but the Blessed
Virgin is, and a vessel of holy water guards the entrance against evil
spirits.

A feeling of shame seizes me, and I fear to sully the ideal of a pure
heart which has erected this temple to the Virgin over the grave of her
only love, who has been dead ten years, and in confusion I attempt to
decline the kindly offer. But the good lady insists: "It will do you
good, if you sacrifice your earthly love to the love of God, and of
your child. Believe me, this thornless love will preserve your peace of
mind and cheerfulness of spirit, and under the protection of the Virgin
you will sleep quietly."

I kiss her hand as a sign of gratitude for her sacrifice, and consent
with a feeling of humility of which I had not thought myself capable.
The powers seem to be gracious to me, and to have arranged the
sufferings they have ordained for my improvement. Still, for some
reason or other, I wish to sleep another night in Saxen, and put off
my change of residence till the next day. So I return with my aunt to
my child. Looking at the house from the street, I discover that the
lightning-conductor is fastened exactly above my bed.

What an infernal coincidence! It makes me think again that I am the
subject of a personal persecution. I also notice that my window
commands a pleasant prospect, looking out as it does on a poorhouse
occupied by released criminals and sick people, among whom several are
dying. A sorry spectacle truly, to have continually before one's eyes!

In Saxen I pack my things and prepare for departure. I part with sorrow
from my child, who has become so dear to me. The cruelty of the old
woman, who has succeeded in separating me from wife and child, enrages
me. Angrily I shake my fist against a painting of her which hangs
over my bed, and utter an imprecation against her. Two hours later a
terrible storm breaks over the village. One lightning flash succeeds
another, the rain pours in torrents, the sky is pitch dark.

The next day I am in Klam, where the rose-coloured room awaits me. Over
my aunt's house there hangs a cloud in the shape of a dragon. They tell
me that a house quite close by has been struck by lightning, and that
the torrents of rain have injured haystacks and carried away bridges.

On the 10th of September a cyclone has devastated Paris, and that under
most extraordinary circumstances. Without any warning, it suddenly
rises behind St. Sulpice in the Jardin de Luxembourg, grazes the
Théâtre du Châlet and the police station, and disappears behind the
St. Louis hospital, after it has torn up iron gratings for fifty yards
round. Regarding this cyclone and the one in the Jardin des Plantes, my
theosophical friend asks me, "What is a cyclone? Is it an ebullition of
hatred, the eruption of some passion, the effluence of some spirit?"

It must be a coincidence, or rather, more than a coincidence, that in
a letter which crosses his, I have asked him as one initiated in the
occult doctrines of the Hindus, "Can the philosophers of Hindustan
cause cyclones?"

I began to suspect the adepts in magic of persecuting me on account of
my gold-making or my obstinacy, and of wishing to bring me in complete
subjection to their society. In the _German Mythology_ of Rydberg and
in _Wärend och Widarne_ of Hilten-Cavallius, I had read that witches
were in the habit of appearing in a storm or in short and violent gusts
of wind. I mention this to show my mental condition before I fell in
with Swedenborg's teaching.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sanctuary shines in white and rose, and the saint will soon join
his disciple, who summons him from their common fatherland in order
to revive the memory of the man who was more highly equipped with
spiritual gifts than any born of woman in these modern times. France
sent Anskar[1] in the early middle ages to baptise Sweden; a thousand
years later Sweden sent Swedenborg to re-baptise France by means of
his disciple Saint-Martin. The Martinist orders, who know the rôle
they have to play in the founding of a new France, will not undervalue
the purport of these words, and still less the significance of the
above-mentioned millennium.


[1] French missionary (801-865 A.D.).




VIII

SWEDENBORG


My mother-in-law and my aunt completely resemble each other in
character, tastes, and inclinations, and each sees in the other her
counterpart. On the first evening of my stay I narrate to them my
mysterious adventures, doubts, and sufferings. They both exclaim,
with a certain look of satisfaction in their faces, "You are where
we have already been." Both starting from a neutral point of view
as regards religion had begun to study occultism. From that moment
onwards they suffered from sleepless nights, mysterious accidents
accompanied by terrible fears, and at last, attacks of madness. The
invisible furies pursue their prey up to the very gates of the city
of refuge--religion. But before they have got so far the protecting
angel reveals himself--and that is Swedenborg. The good ladies wrongly
suppose that I have a thorough acquaintance with the writings of my
fellow-countrymen. Astonished at my ignorance, they give me, with a
certain air of reserve, however, an old volume in German, saying, "Take
it, read, and don't be afraid."

"Afraid? Why should I be?" I answer.

Returning to the rose-coloured room, I open the book at haphazard and
read. The reader may conceive my astonishment when my eyes fall on the
description of one of Swedenborg's hells which exactly reproduces the
landscape of Klam, as I saw it in the zinc bath. The crater-shaped
valley, the pine-crowned hill, the ravine with the stream, the heaps of
dung, the pig-sty--they are all there.

Hell? But I have been brought up in the profoundest contempt of the
doctrine of hell, as one consigned to the rubbish-heap of out-worn
ideas. And yet I cannot deny the fact--and that is the novelty in
this exposition of the doctrine of so-called eternal punishment--we
are already in hell. Earth, earth is hell? the dungeon appointed by
a superior power, in which I cannot move a step without injuring the
happiness of others, and in which others cannot remain happy without
hurting me. Thus Swedenborg depicts hell, and perhaps without knowing
it, earthly life, at the same time.

The fire of hell is the wish to rise in the world; the powers awaken
this wish and allow the damned souls to get all they want. But as
soon as the goal is reached, and the wish is fulfilled, everything is
seen to be worthless and the victory is null and void. Oh, vanity of
vanities! Then, after the first disappointment, the powers rekindle
the flame of ambition and desire; and satisfied greed and satiety are
still a worse torment than unquenched appetite. Thus the Devil suffers
everlasting punishment, for he gets all he wants at once, so that he
cannot enjoy it.

When I compare the Swedenborgian hells with the punishments described
in the _German Mythology_, I find an obvious likeness, but for me the
bare fact that both these books have fallen into my hand exactly at
the right moment is the essential point. I am in hell, and damnation
weighs upon me like a heavy burden. When I go over my past, my
childhood already appears to me like a prison house or torture chamber.
In order to explain the sufferings inflicted upon innocent children,
one has only to suppose an earlier existence, out of which we have
been cast down in order to bear the consequences of forgotten sins.
With a docile mind, which is my chief weakness, I receive a deep and
sombre impression from my reading of Swedenborg. And the powers let
me rest no more. Walking along the little brook in the neighbourhood
of the village, I reach the so-called ravine path between the two
mountains. The entrance between fallen and precipitous rocks has a
wonderful attraction for me. The almost perpendicular hill, crowned by
the deserted castle, forms the gate of the ravine, in which the stream
drives a water-mill. A freak of nature has given the rock the form of
a Turk's head, a fact well known in the neighbourhood. Underneath, the
miller's shed leans against the wall of rock. Upon the latch of the
door hangs a goat's horn smeared over with fat, and by it stands a
broom. This is certainly quite natural and ordinary, yet I cannot help
asking myself what devil has put these two symbols of witchcraft, the
goat's horn and the broom, just this morning in my way? I press farther
on up the damp, dark, and uneven path, and come to a wooden building,
the strange aspect of which makes me stop. It is a long, low erection,
with six openings like oven doors. Oven doors! Ye gods, where am I then?

The image of Dante's hell, the red-glowing tombs of the heresiarchs,
rises before me--and the six oven doors! Is it a bad dream? No,
commonplace fact, for a frightful stench, a stream of dirt, and a
chorus of grunting reveals to me immediately that I have a pig-sty in
front of me.

Between the miller's house and the hill, just under the Turk's head,
the path contracts to a narrow passage. As I go farther along it,
I find myself confronted by a large, wolf-coloured Danish dog, a
counterpart of the monster which guarded the studio in the Rue de la
Santé in Paris. I retreat two steps, but immediately remember Jacques
Cœur's motto, "To a brave heart nothing is impossible," and press
onward into the ravine. Cerberus appears not to notice me, and so I
pursue the path which now winds between low and gloomy houses. On one
side, a black, tailless fowl with a red comb is running about, on the
other a woman wearing a red crescent-shaped ornament on her forehead
comes out of a house. She looks beautiful at first, but as she comes
nearer, I see that she is toothless and ugly.

The waterfall and the mill combined make a noise like that roaring in
the ears which I had during my first period of disquiet in Paris. The
white-powdered miller's men, who control the machinery, look like
angels or executioners, and the never-ceasing stream of water rushes
from under the great never-resting wheel. Then I reach the smithy
with its bare-armed, blackened workmen armed with tongs, choppers,
screw-vices, and hammers; amid the flames and sparks of the furnace
there lie red-glowing iron and molten lead. There is a frightful din,
which makes my brain vibrate and my heart leap. Farther on groans the
great saw of the saw-mill, and tortures with gnashing teeth the giant
tree-trunks which lie on the block, while the sawdust trickles down on
the damp ground.

The ravine-path, terribly devastated by cyclones and storms, continues
along the stream; the subsiding overflow has left a greyish-green layer
of mud behind, covering the sharp pebbles on which my feet continually
slip. I wish to cross the water, but since the little bridge has been
swept away, I halt under a precipice whose overhanging rock threatens
to fall on an image of the Virgin, who seems to support the sinking
hill on her tender shoulders.

Meditating on this combination of coincidences, which, taken together,
without being supernatural, form a remarkable whole, I return home.

       *       *       *       *       *

Eight days and eight quiet nights I spend in the rose-coloured room. My
peace of mind returns with the daily visits of my little daughter, who
loves me, and whom I love. By my relations I am treated like a sick,
spoilt child. The reading of Swedenborg occupies me during the day and
depresses me by the realism of its descriptions. All my observations,
feelings, and thoughts are so vividly reflected there, that his visions
seem to me like experiences and real "human documents." It is no
question of blind faith; it is enough for me to read his experiences
and to compare with them my own. The book I have is only an extract;
the chief riddle of the spiritual life will be solved for me later on
when his _Arcana Cœlestia_ falls into my hands. In the midst of my
reflections, which lead to the newly-won conviction that there is a God
who punishes, some lines of Swedenborg comfort me, and immediately I
begin to excuse myself and yield to my old pride. In the evening I take
my mother-in-law into my confidence, and ask her, "Do you think I am a
damned soul?"

"No; although I have never seen any human destiny like yours; but you
have not yet found the right way to lead you to the Lord."

"Do you remember Swedenborg and his _Principia Cœli_, how he
describes the stages of spiritual progress? First, an elevated
ambition. Now, my ambition has never led me to strive after honour, nor
to try to impress people with a sense of my ability. Secondly, love of
happiness and money, in order to profit people. You know that I seek
no gain and despise money. As regards my gold-making, I have sworn in
the presence of the powers that any profits I made should be used for
humanitarian, scientific, and religious objects. Finally, wedded love.
Need I say that from my youth I have concentrated my love of woman
on the idea of marriage, of the family, and the wife. What in actual
experience befell me that I should marry the widow of a man who was
still alive, is an irony of fate which I cannot explain, but which
cannot be regarded as a serious misdemeanour when contrasted with the
irregularities of ordinary bachelor life."

After some moments of reflection, my mother-in-law replied: "I cannot
dispute your assertion; for I have found in your writings a spirit
of aspiration and endeavour, whose efforts have been involuntarily
frustrated. Certainly, you must be doing penance, for sins which you
committed before your birth. You must in your former existence have
been a blood-stained conqueror, and therefore you suffer repeatedly the
terrors of death without being able to die. Now be religious inwardly
and outwardly."

"You mean that I should become a Catholic?"

"Yes."

"Swedenborg says it is forbidden to quit the religion of one's fathers,
for everyone belongs to the spiritual territory on which he is born."

"The Catholic religion receives graciously everyone who seeks it."

"I will be content with a lower position. In case of need I can find a
place among the Jews and Mohammedans, who are also admitted to heaven.
I am modest."

"Grace is offered you, but you prefer the mess of pottage to the right
of the first-born."

"The right of the first-born for the _Son of a Servant_![1] Too much!
Too much!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Restored to self-respect by Swedenborg, I regard myself once more as
Job, the righteous and sinless man, whom the Eternal tries in order
to show the wicked the example of a righteous man enduring unjust
sufferings.

My pious vanity is tickled by the idea. I am proud of the distinction
of being persecuted by misfortune, and am never weary of repeating,
"See! how I have suffered." Before my relatives I accuse myself of
living in too much luxury, and my rose-coloured room seems to me to
be a satire upon me. They notice my sincere repentance, and overwhelm
me with kindnesses and little indulgences. In brief, I am one of the
elect; Swedenborg has said it, and confident of the protection of the
Eternal, I challenge the demons to combat.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the eighth day which I spend in my rose-coloured room the news
arrives that my mother-in-law's mother, who lives on the bank of the
Danube, is ill. She has a pain in the liver accompanied with vomiting,
sleeplessness, and attacks of palpitation at night. My aunt whose
hospitality I enjoy is summoned thither, and I am to return to my
mother-in-law in Saxen. To my objection that the old lady has forbidden
it, they reply that she has withdrawn her order of expulsion, so that
I am free to arrange my residence where I like. This sudden change of
mind astonishes me, and I hardly dare to attribute it to her illness.
The next day she gets worse. My mother-in-law gives me in the name
of her mother a bouquet as a sign of reconciliation, and tells me in
confidence that, besides other wild fancies, the old lady thinks she
has a snake in her body. The next news is that she has been robbed of
1000 gulden, and suspects her landlady of stealing them. The latter
is enraged at the unjust suspicion and wishes to bring an action for
libel. The old lady, who had retired hither to die quietly, finds her
domestic peace completely destroyed. She is continually sending us
something--flowers, fruit, game, pheasants, poultry, fish.

Is the old lady's conscience troubled at the prospect of judgment? Does
she remember that she once had me put out on the street, and so obliged
me to go to hospital? Or is she superstitious? Does she think she is
bewitched by me? Perhaps the presents she sends are meant as offerings
to the wizard, to still his thirst for vengeance.

Unfortunately, just at this juncture, there comes a work on magic
from Paris containing information regarding so-called witchcraft. The
author tells the reader that he must not regard himself as innocent,
if he merely avoids using magic arts; one must rather keep watch over
one's own evil will, which by itself alone is capable of exercising an
influence over others in their absence.

The results of this teaching on my mind are twofold. In the first
place, it arouses my scruples at the present juncture, for I had
raised my fist in anger against the old lady's picture and cursed her.
Secondly, it reawakens my old suspicions that I myself am the victim
of mal-practices on the part of occultists or theosophists. Pangs of
conscience on one side, fear on the other! And the two millstones begin
to grind me to powder.

       *       *       *       *       *

Swedenborg describes Hell as follows: The damned soul inhabits a
splendid palace, leads a luxurious life there, and regards himself as
one of the elect. Gradually the splendours disappear, and the wretched
soul finds that it is confined in a wretched hovel and surrounded by
filth. This is parallelled in my own experience.

The rose-coloured room has disappeared, and as I remove into a large
chamber near that of my mother-in-law, I feel that my stay here will
not be of long duration. As a matter of fact, all possible trifles
combine to poison my life and to deprive me of the necessary quiet
for work. The planks of the floor sway under my feet, the table
wobbles, the chair is unsteady, the articles on the washing-stand clash
together, the bed creaks, and the rest of the furniture moves whenever
I cross the floor. The lamp smokes, the ink-pot is too narrow so that
the pen-holder gets inky. The farmhouse smells of dung and manure,
ammonia, sulphuretted hydrogen, and sulphuric acid. The whole day there
is a noise of cows, swine, calves, cocks, turkeys, and doves. Flies
and wasps worry me by day, and gnats by night. At the village shop
there is nothing to be had. Because there is no other sort, I must use
rose-coloured ink. Strange, too! In a packet of cigarette papers which
I buy there is a single rose-coloured one among a hundred white. It is
a miniature hell, and I, who am accustomed to bear great sufferings,
suffer inexpressibly from these needle-pricks, all the more that my
mother-in-law believes that I am not satisfied by her kind attentions.

       *       *       *       *       *

_September_ 17_th_.--I awake at night and hear the church clock of the
village strike thirteen. Immediately I feel the electric band encircle
me, and think I hear a noise in the attic above me.

_September_ 19_th_.--I search the attic and discover a dozen distaffs,
the wheels of which remind me of electric machines. I open a large
box; it is empty; only five staves painted black, the use of which is
unknown to me, lie in the form of a pentagram at the bottom of the box.
Who has played me this trick, and what does it mean? I do not venture
to ask anything about it, and the riddle remains unsolved.

Between midnight and two o'clock a terrible storm breaks out. As a rule
a storm exhausts itself and soon subsides; this one, however, remains
raging for two hours over the village. Every lightning flash is a
personal attack on me, but none of them strike me.

In the evening my mother-in-law relates to me the history of the
district. What a monstrous collection of domestic and other tragedies,
consisting of adulteries, divorces, lawsuits between relatives,
murders, thefts, violations, incests, slanders. The castles, the
villas, the huts are occupied by unhappy people of all kinds, and I
cannot take my walks without thinking of Swedenborg's hells. Beggars,
imbeciles of both sexes, sick persons and cripples line the high roads
or kneel at the foot of a crucifix, a Madonna, or a martyr. At night
the wretched creatures try to escape their sleeplessness and their
bad dreams by wandering about in the meadows and woods in order to
fatigue themselves, and to be able to sleep. Members of good society,
well-educated ladies, even a pastor, are among them.

Not far from us is a convent which serves as a penitentiary and rescue
home. It is a real prison, in which the strictest rules prevail. In
the winter when the thermometer registers twenty degrees of frost,
the penitents must sleep on the cold stone pavement of their cells,
and their hands and feet, which they cannot warm, are covered with
chilblains.

Among the others is a woman who has sinned with a priest, which is
a deadly sin. Tortured by pangs of conscience, she flies in her
despair to her confessor, who, however, refuses her absolution and
the sacrament. A deadly sin entails damnation. Then the wretched
creature loses her reason, imagines that she is dead, wanders from
village to village and implores the priests to be merciful and to bury
her in consecrated ground. Shunned and driven away everywhere, she
wanders about, howling like a wild beast, and those who see her cross
themselves and exclaim, "She is damned!" No one doubts but that her
soul is already in hell, while her shadow, a wandering corpse, wanders
about as a terrible warning.

They tell me of a man who, possessed by the Devil, has so altered his
personality that the Evil One can make him utter blasphemies against
his will. After long search they discover a suitable exorcist in a
young Franciscan monk of acknowledged purity of life. He prepares
himself by fast and penance; the great day comes, and the possessed man
makes his confession in church before the people. Thereupon the young
monk sets to work and succeeds, after prayers and conjurations which
last an entire day, in driving out the Devil. The alarmed spectators
have not ventured to relate the details of the affair. A year later
the young monk dies. These and still more tragic narratives confirm
me in my conviction that this district has been marked out as a place
for penance, and there must be some mysterious connection between this
neighbourhood and Swedenborg's hell. Has he perhaps visited this part
of upper Austria, and, just as Dante describes the region south of
Naples, drawn from nature in his account of hell?

       *       *       *       *       *

After a couple of weeks have passed in work and study I am again
unsettled, as with the setting in of autumn my aunt and mother-in-law
wish to live together in Klam. We therefore break up our camp. In order
to preserve my independence, I hire a cottage consisting of two rooms,
so as to be quite close to my little daughter.

The first evening after settling in my new quarters I am overcome
by a terrible depression, as though the air were poisoned. I go to
my mother-in-law: "If I sleep up there you will find me dead in bed
to-morrow. Shelter a pilgrim for this night, my good mother!"

The rose-coloured room is at once placed at my disposal, but, good
heavens! how it has altered since my aunt's departure! There is black
furniture in it; the empty pigeon-holes of a bookcase gape like so many
jaws; a tall iron oven, ornamented with ugly devices of salamanders
and dragons, confronts me like a spectre. In a word, there reigns such
a disharmony in the room as makes me feel poorly. Moreover, every
irregularity upsets my nerves, for I am a man of ordered habits who
does everything at stated hours. In spite of my efforts to conceal my
dissatisfaction, my mother-in-law reads my thoughts.

"Always dissatisfied, my child?"

She does her best to allay my discontent, but when the spirit of
dissension is once aroused, everything is in vain. She tries to
remember my favourite dishes, but everything goes wrong. There is
nothing I dislike more than calf's head with brown butter.

"Here is something nice," she says to me, "expressly for you," and
sets calf's head with brown butter before me. I understand that
it is an unconscious mistake on her part, but can only eat with
scarcely-concealed repugnance and simulated appetite.

"You are not eating anything!"

It is too much! Formerly I attributed these annoyances to feminine
malice; now I acquit everyone and say, "It is the Devil!"

       *       *       *       *       *

From my early days I am accustomed to plan out the day's work during
my morning walk. No one, not even my wife, has ever been allowed to
accompany me on it. And, as a matter of fact, in the morning my mind
rejoices in a feeling of harmony and happy elevation which borders on
ecstasy. My corporeal part seems to have disappeared, my griefs to have
fled; I am all soul. The early morning is my time of self-collection,
my hour of prayer, my matins.

Now I must sacrifice it all, and give up my most innocent pleasure. The
powers compel me to renounce this last and purest enjoyment. My little
daughter wishes to accompany me. I embrace her tenderly, and tell her
why I wish to be alone, but she does not understand it. She cries, and
I have not the heart to sadden her to-day, but make a firm resolve not
to allow her again to misuse her rights. She is certainly thoroughly
fascinating as a child, with her originality, her cheerfulness, her
gratitude for trifles, that is, when one has leisure to be occupied
with her. But when one is absent-minded and distracted, it is intensely
annoying to be plagued with endless questions and changes of mood about
mere nothings.

My little one is as jealous as a lover about my thoughts; she seems to
watch for the exact opportunity to destroy a carefully-woven web of
thought with her prattle--but no, it is not she who does it; she is
only an instrument, but I seem to be the object of deliberate attacks
by a poor little innocent. I go on with slow steps; I don't seek to
escape any more, but my soul is a prisoner, and my brain exhausted
by the effort of continually having to descend to a child's level.
What, however, pains me intensely is the deep, reproachful look she
casts at me when she thinks I find her a nuisance, and imagines that I
love her no longer. Then her open joyous little face falls, her looks
are averted, her heart is closed to me, and I feel myself bereft of
the light which this child had brought into my dark soul. I kiss her,
take her on my arm, look for flowers and pretty pebbles for her, cut
a switch for her, and pretend to be a cow which she is driving to the
meadow. She is contented and happy, and life smiles at me again.

I have sacrificed my morning hour. So do I atone for the evil which in
a moment of madness I had wished to conjure down on this angel's head.
What a penance--to be loved! Truly the powers are not so cruel as we
are!


[1] The title of Strindberg's first autobiography.




IX

EXTRACTS FROM THE DIARY OF A DAMNED SOUL

_October, November_, 1896


The Brahmin has fulfilled his duty as regards life when he has begotten
a child. Then he goes into the desert, to dedicate himself to solitude
and asceticism.

       *       *       *       *       *

_My mother-in-law_.--"What have you done in your former human existence
that Fate deals so hardly with you?"

_I_.--"Think! Remember a man who was first married to another man's
wife, like myself, and who separated from her in order to marry an
Austrian, like myself! Then his little Austrian is torn from him, as
mine has been from me, and their only child is kept in the Bohemian
mountains as mine is. Do you remember the hero of my romance, _On the
Open Sea_, who commits suicide on an island----"

_M_.--"Enough! Enough!"

_I_.--"You don't know that my father's mother was called Neipperg----"

_M_.--"Stop! Unhappy man!"

_I_.--"And that my little Christina resembles the greatest murderer
of the century to a hair. Only look at her, the little tyrant, the
man-tamer at two and a half!"

_M_.--"You are mad."

_I_.--"Yes! And what sins have you women formerly committed, since your
lot is still harder than ours? See how justly I have called woman our
evil angel. Each has his or her deserts."

_M_.-"To be a woman is a twofold hell."

_I_.--"And so woman is a twofold devil. As regards reincarnation,
that is a Christian doctrine which has been maintained by some of the
clergy. Christ said that John the Baptist was Elijah reborn on earth.
Is that an authority or not?"

_M_.--"Yes, but the Roman Church forbids inquiry into secrets."

_I_.--"And science permits it, as soon as science itself is tolerated."

       *       *       *       *       *

The spirits of discord are abroad, and despite of the fact that we are
quite aware of their game and our freedom from blame in the matter,
our repeated misunderstandings leave a bitter wish for revenge behind
them. Moreover, both sisters suspect that my evil wishes caused their
mother's mysterious illness, and remembering that it is to my interest
to have my separation from my wife terminated, they cannot suppress the
fairly reasonable thought that the death of the old lady would cause me
joy. The mere existence of this wish makes me hateful in their eyes,
and I do not venture any more to ask how their mother is because I fear
to be regarded as a hypocrite.

The situation is strained, and my two former friends exhaust themselves
in endless discussions regarding my person, my character, my feelings,
and the sincerity of my love for the little one. At one time they
regard me as a saint, and the scars in my hands as wound-prints. And
certainly the marks on my palms resemble large nail-holes. But in
order to put an end to all ideas of saintship, I designate myself the
penitent thief, who has come down from the cross and started on his
pilgrimage to Paradise.

Another time, they try to solve the riddle by regarding me as Robert
the Devil. At that time many incidents occurred, sufficient to give
ground for fearing that I might be stoned by the inhabitants of the
place. Here is a simple fact. My little Christina has an extraordinary
dread of chimney sweeps. One evening, at supper, she suddenly begins to
scream, points at someone invisible behind my chair, and cries, "The
chimney sweep!"

My mother-in-law, who believes in the clairvoyance of children and
animals, turns pale; and I become alarmed all the more as I see my
mother-in-law make the sign of a cross over the child's head. A dead
silence ensues, which puts a stop to all cheerfulness.

       *       *       *       *       *

The autumn with its storms, heavy rains, and dark nights has come.
In the village and the poorhouse the number of the sick, dying, and
dead increases. In the night one hears the choir-boy ring the bell
before the Host. All through the day the church bell is tolling, and
one funeral follows another. Death and life have grown into a single
horror. My night attacks recommence. Prayers are said for me, beads
are told, and the holy water vessel in my room is filled by the priest
himself. "The hand of the Lord rests heavily on thee!" with these
words my mother-in-law crushes me. But slowly I recover myself. My
mental elasticity and an inborn scepticism free me again from these
black thoughts, and after the perusal of certain occult writings, I
believe myself to be persecuted by spirits of the elements, incubi and
Lamias[1] who wish to hinder me in the completion of my great work
on Alchemy. Instructed by the initiated in such matters, I procure a
Dalmatian dagger, and consider myself well-armed against evil spirits.

In the village a shoemaker dies, who was an atheist and blasphemer.
He had a jackdaw, who now left to himself lives on the roof of a
neighbouring house. While watch is being kept by the dead, they
suddenly discover the jackdaw in the room without anyone being able
to explain how it got there. On the day of the burial, the black
bird accompanies the funeral procession, and perches on the coffin
in the churchyard before the ceremony. Every morning this creature
follows me in my walk, a fact which really disquiets me because of
the superstitious nature of the people. One day, which is destined
to prove its last, the jackdaw accompanies me with horrible screams
and words of abuse, which the blasphemer had taught him, through the
streets of the village. Then there come two little birds, a robin
and a yellow wagtail, and follow the jackdaw from roof to roof. The
jackdaw flies outside the village and perches on the roof of a cottage.
At the same moment a black rabbit springs up before the cottage, and
disappears in the grass. Some days afterwards we hear of the jackdaw's
death. It had been killed by the street boys because of its propensity
for stealing.

       *       *       *       *       *

During the day I work in my little house. But for some time past it
seems that the powers are no longer well intentioned towards me. When
I enter the house I find the air thick, as if it had been poisoned,
and have to open doors and windows. Wrapped in a thick cloak, with
a fur cap on my head, I sit at the table and write, and resist the
so-called electric attacks which compress my chest and seize me in the
back. Often I feel as though someone were standing behind my chair.
Then I stab with the dagger behind me, and imagine I am fighting an
enemy. So it goes on till five o'clock in the afternoon. If I remain
sitting longer, the conflict becomes terrific, until, feeling wholly
exhausted, I light my lantern and go to my mother-in-law and my
child. On one occasion, as early as two or three o'clock, I find my
room full of the thick and choking atmosphere I have spoken of. But I
continue the struggle till six o'clock in order to finish an article on
chemistry. On a bunch of flowers sits a lady-bird marked with yellow
and black--the Austrian colours. It clambers about, gropes, and seeks
for a flying-off place. At last it falls on my paper, spreads out its
wings exactly like the weathercock on the church of Notre-Dame des
Champs in Paris, then crawls along the manuscript and up my right hand.
It looks at me, and then flies towards the window; the compass on the
table points towards the north.

"Very well!" I say to myself, "to the north then; but not before I
choose; till I am summoned again, I remain where I am."

Six o'clock strikes, and it is impossible to remain in this haunted
house. Unknown forces lift me from my chair and I must leave the place.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is All Souls' Day, about three o'clock in the afternoon; the sun
shines and the air is clear. The villagers are going in a procession
led by the clergy, with banners and music, to the church-yard, to
greet the dead. The bells begin to ring. Then, without a warning,
without even one cloud appearing as precursor in the pale blue sky, a
storm breaks loose. The banners flap violently against the poles, the
festal robes of the men and women are a prey of the winds. Dust-clouds
rise and whirl; trees bend. It is a real wonder.

I feel afraid of the next night, and my mother-in-law knows it. She has
given me a charm to wear round my neck. It is a Madonna and a cross
made out of consecrated wood--the timber of a church which is more
than a thousand years old. I accepted it as a valuable present offered
in good will, but a lingering respect for the religion of my fathers
prevents my wearing it round my neck.

It is about eight o'clock, and we are having our evening meal; the
lamp burns and a weird stillness reigns in our little circle. Outside
it is dark; there is no wind in the trees; all is quiet. All at once
a single gust of wind blows through the crevices of the window with
a curious humming noise like that of a Jew's-harp. Then it is past.
My mother-in-law throws a look of alarm at me and folds the child
in her arms. In a second I interpret what her look means: "Leave
us, O damned soul, and do not bring avenging demons on our innocent
heads." Everything goes to pieces; my last remaining happiness, the
companionship of my little daughter, is taken from me, and in the
gloomy silence I mentally bid the world adieu.

After the evening meal I withdraw to the once rose-coloured--now
black--room and prepare, since I feel myself threatened, for a
night-battle. With whom? I know not, but challenge the Invisible,
be it diabolic or divine, and will wrestle with It, like Jacob with
the angel. There is a knock at the door. It is my mother-in-law, who
forebodes a bad night for me, and invites me to sleep on the sofa in
her sitting-room. "The presence of the child will safeguard you," she
says. I thank her and assure her there is no danger, and that nothing
can frighten me so long as my conscience is untroubled. With a smile
she wishes me good-night.

I put on my martial cloak, boots and cap again, determined to lie down
dressed and ready to die like a brave warrior who despises life and
challenges death. About eleven o'clock the air in the room begins to
grow dense, and a deadly fear masters my courageous heart. I open the
window. The draught threatens to blow out the lamp. I close it again.
The lamp begins to make a sound between a sigh and a moan; then all is
still again.

A dog in the village howls. According to popular superstition, this
is a sign of death. I look out of the window; only the Great Bear is
visible. Down there in the poorhouse a light is burning; an old woman
is sitting bent over her work, as though she were waiting for her
release; perhaps she fears sleep and its dreams. Weary, I lie down
again on the bed, and try to sleep. At once the old game recommences.
An electric stream seeks my heart; my lungs cease to work; I must rise
or die. I sit down on a chair, but am too exhausted to be able to read,
and spend half an hour thus in listless vacancy. Then I resolve to go
for a walk till daybreak. I leave the house. The night is dark and the
village asleep, but the dogs are not. One attacks me, and then the
whole band surrounds me; their wide-open jaws and fiery eyes compel me
to retreat.

When I open the door of my room and enter, it seems to me as though it
were full of hostile living creatures through whom I must force my way
in order to reach my bed. Resigned, and resolved to die, I throw myself
upon it. But at the last moment, when the invisible vulture is about
to stifle me under its wings, someone lifts me up, and the pursuit of
the furies is at an end. Conquered, hurled to the earth, beaten down, I
quit the scene of an unequal battle and yield to the invisible. I knock
at the door on the other side of the passage. My mother-in-law, who
is still at prayer, opens the door. The expression of her face as she
looks at me makes me feel afraid of myself.

"What do you wish, my child?"

"I wish to die, and then to be burnt, or rather, burn me alive!"

She does not answer. She has understood me, and sympathy and pity
conquer her fear, so that she prepares the sofa for me with her own
hand. Then she retires to her own room where she sleeps with the
child. Through a chance--always this Satanic chance!--the sofa stands
opposite the window, and the same chance has willed that it has no
curtains, so that the black window opening gapes at me. Moreover, it is
the very same window through which the wind gust came when we were at
supper. With all my powers exhausted, I sink on the sofa. I curse this
ever-present, unavoidable "chance" which persecutes me with the obvious
purpose of making me fall a victim to persecution-mania. For five
minutes I have rest, while my eyes are fastened on the black square
of the window; then an invisible something glides over my body, and I
stand up. I remain standing in the middle of the room like a statue for
hours, half-conscious, turned to stone, I know not whether awake or
asleep.

Who gives me the strength to suffer? Who denies me the power, and
delivers me over to torments? Is it He, the Lord of life and death,
Whose wrath I have provoked, when, influenced by the pamphlet _The
Joy of Dying_, I tried to die, and considered myself already ripe for
eternal life? Am I Phlegyas doomed to the pains of Tartarus for his
pride, or Prometheus, who, because he revealed the secret of the powers
to mortals, was torn by the vulture?

(While I am writing this, I think of the scene in the sufferings of
Christ when the soldiers spit in His face, some buffet Him and others
strike Him with rods and say to Him, "Tell us, who is he that smote
thee?"

Perhaps my old companions in Stockholm remember that orgy when the
author of this book played the rôle of the soldier?)

Who has struck thee? A question without an answer. Doubt, uncertainty,
mystery--there is my hell! Oh that my enemy would reveal himself, that
I might do battle with him, and defy him! But that is just what he
avoids doing, in order to afflict me with madness and make me feel the
scourge of conscience, which causes me to suspect enemies everywhere,
enemies, i.e., those injured by my evil will. Indeed, my conscience
smites me every time that I come on the track of a new foe.

       *       *       *       *       *

Awoken the next morning after a few hours' sleep by the prattle of my
little Christina, I seem to forget all, and go to my usual work, which
is not unsuccessful. Everything that I write is immediately accepted
and printed--a proof that my senses and understanding are unimpaired.

Meanwhile the papers spread the report that an American scientific man
has discovered a method of converting silver into gold. This saves
me from being suspected of being an adept in the black art, a fool,
or a swindler. My theosophical friend, who has hitherto furnished me
with the means of livelihood, tries to enrol me in his sect. He sends
me one of Madame Blavatsky's occult treatises and ill conceals his
anxiety that I should pronounce a favourable verdict upon it. I also am
embarrassed, for I see that the continuance of our friendly relations
will depend upon my answer.

Madame Blavatsky's _Secret Doctrine_ is plagiarised from all the
so-called occult theories; it is a hash-up of all ancient and
modern scientific heresies. Her book is worthless as regards her
own presumptuous claims, interesting through its quotations from
little-known authors, repellent through its conscious or unconscious
fabrications regarding the Mahatmas. It is the work of a mannish woman,
who, in order to put man to shame, undertook to overthrow science,
religion, and philosophy, and to set a priestess of Isis on the altar
of the Crucified.

With all the reserve and moderation which is due to a friend, I let
my friend know that the collective god, Karma, does not please me,
and that it is impossible for me to belong to a sect which denies
a personal God, Who alone can satisfy my religious needs. It is a
confession of faith which is demanded from me, and although I know that
my answer entails a breach in our friendship, and the cessation of my
means of support, I speak it out freely.

Then my faithful friend turns into a demon of vengeance. He hurls
an excommunication against me, threatens me with occult powers,
tries to intimidate me by vulgar accusations, and storms at me like
a heathenish sacrificial priest. Finally, he summons me before an
occultist tribunal, and swears to me that I shall never forget the
13th of November. My situation is painful; I have lost a friend and
am nearly destitute. By a diabolical chance during our paper war, the
following incident takes place: _L'Initiation_ publishes an article by
me which criticises the current astronomical system. A few days after
its appearance Tisserand, the head of the Paris observatory, dies. In
an access of mischievous humour I trace a connection between these two
things, and mention also that Pasteur died the day after I published
_Sylva Sylvarum_.[2] My friend, the theosophist, does not know how to
take a joke, and being superstitious above the average, and perhaps,
more deeply initiated in black magic than I, gives me clearly to
understand that he regards me as a wizard.

One may imagine my consternation when, after the last letter of our
correspondence, the most famous of the Swedish astronomers dies of
a fit of apoplexy. I am alarmed, and with reason. To be accused of
witchcraft is a very serious matter, and "even after death one will not
escape punishment."

Further calamities follow. In the course of a month about five
well-known astronomers die, one after another. I fear my fanatical
friend, whom I credit with the cruelty of a Druid and with the power of
the Hindu yogis who can kill at a distance.

Here is a new hell of anxieties. From this day onwards I forget the
demons, and direct all my attention to the unwholesome ranks of the
theosophists and their magicians, the Hindu sages, supposed to be
gifted with incredible powers. I now feel myself condemned to death,
and keep sealed my papers, in which, in case of my sudden death, I have
specified the murderers. Then I wait.

A few miles eastward on the bank of the Danube, lies the little chief
town of the district Grein. There, I am told, a stranger from Zanzibar
has arrived at the end of November in midwinter. That is enough to
rouse doubts and dark thoughts in a morbid mind. I try to obtain
information regarding the stranger, whether he is really an African,
whence he has come, and what is his object?

I can learn nothing; a mysterious veil envelops the unknown, who, like
a spectre, stands day and night before my anxious mind. I always find
my best comfort in the Old Testament, and I invoke the protection of
the Eternal and His vengeance against my enemies. The psalms of David
best express my soul's deepest needs, and Jehovah is my God. The 86th
Psalm has made a special impression on my mind, and I gladly repeat it.

"O God, the proud have set themselves against me, and tyrants seek
after my soul, and have not thee before their eyes. Show me a token for
good; that all they which hate me may see it, and be ashamed; because
thou, Lord, hast holpen me, and comforted me."

That is the "token" I ask for, and notice well, reader, how my prayer
will be heard.


[1] A kind of female vampire.

[2] A botanical treatise.




X

THE ETERNAL HAS SPOKEN


Winter, with its grey-yellow skies is here; no ray of sunlight has lit
up the sky for weeks. The muddy roads hinder us from taking walks; the
leaves fall from the trees and rot; all nature is dissolving in decay.

The usual autumn butchery of dumb animals has begun. All day long the
cries of the victims rise against the dark vault of heaven; one steps
in blood and among corpses. It is terribly depressing, and I feel sad
for the two, good, kind-hearted sisters who tend me like a sick child.
Besides this, my poverty, which I must conceal from them, depresses me,
together with the futility of my attempts to avert approaching beggary.
For my own good they wish for my departure, since such a lonely life
is not good for a man; moreover, they believe that I need a doctor. In
vain I wait for the necessary money to be sent from Sweden, and prepare
to depart, even though I have to tramp the high roads. "I have become
like a pelican of the wilderness, and like an owl in the desert." My
presence is a trial to my relatives, and but for my love to the child,
they would have hurried me away. Now that mud or snow makes walking
difficult, I carry the little one along the paths on my arms, climb
hills, and clamber up rocks, so that both the old ladies say, "You will
make yourself ill, you will get giddy, you will kill yourself."

"And a beautiful death that would be!" I reply.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the 20th of November, a grey, gloomy, dreary day, we sit at the
mid-day meal. Altogether worn-out after a sleepless night and new
conflicts with the Invisible, I curse life, and lament that no sun
shines.

My mother-in-law has prophesied that I will not be well till Candlemas
(February 2nd), when the sun returns again. "That is my only ray of
sunlight," I answer, pointing to my little Christina who sits opposite
to me. At this moment the clouds, which have been massed together for
weeks, part, and through the cleft a ray of light shines into the room
and illuminates my face, the table-cover, the glasses.

"See, papa! see! there is the sun!" exclaims the child, and clasps her
hands together. I rise in confusion, a prey to the most conflicting
feelings. "A chance? No!" I say to myself. Is it the wonder, the sign
I prayed for? But that would be too much to grant to one fallen into
disfavour like me. The Eternal does not interfere in the little affairs
of earth-worms. And yet this ray of light abides in my heart like a
happy smile on a discontented face. During the couple of minutes which
I take in walking to my little house, the clouds have formed themselves
into strange-shaped groups, and in the east, where the veil has lifted,
the sky is as green as an emerald, or a meadow in mid-summer. I stand
in my room and wait in a state between reverie and mild compunction,
which has no fear in it, for something which I cannot exactly define.

Then suddenly there is a single thunder-clap over my head. No flash has
preceded it. At first I feel alarmed, and wait for the usual rain and
storm to follow. But nothing happens; all is perfectly quiet, and it
is over. "Why," I ask myself, "have I not sunk down in humility before
the voice of the Eternal?" Because, when the Almighty with majestic
condescension allowed an insect to hear His voice, this insect felt
elevated and puffed up by such an honour, considering itself in its
pride to be possessed of some special desert. To speak freely, I felt
myself almost on a level with the Lord, as an integral part of His
personality, an emanation of His being, an organ of His organism. He
needed me in order to reveal Himself; otherwise he would have sent a
thunderbolt and struck me dead upon the spot. But whence springs this
monstrous arrogance in a mortal? Must I trace my origin to the primeval
Titans who revolted against a despot who delighted in ruling over
slaves? Is this why my earthly pilgrimage has become a mere running the
gauntlet, while the dregs of humanity delight to strike, spit on, and
defile me? There is no imaginable humiliation which I have not endured,
yet the more I am crushed the more my pride asserts itself. I am like
Jacob wrestling with the angel, and though a little lamed, maintaining
the conflict manfully; or Job, chastised, and yet steadily justifying
himself in the face of undeserved punishments.

Attacked by so many conflicting thoughts, I relapse from my
megalomania, and feel so insignificant, that the incident dwindles down
to a mere nothing--a thunder-clap in November.

But the echo of the thunder reverberates, and once more in a sort of
religious ecstasy I open the Bible at haphazard, and pray the Lord to
speak more plainly that I may understand Him. My eyes immediately fall
upon this verse in Job: "Wilt thou disannul my judgment? Wilt thou
condemn me that thou mayest be justified? Hast thou an arm like God?
_Or canst thou thunder with a voice like Him?_"

I doubt no more. The Eternal has spoken! O Eternal! What demandest Thou
of me? Speak, for thy servant heareth!

No answer!

Good! I will humble myself before the Eternal Who has humbled Himself
to speak to His servant. But bow my knee before the mob and the mighty?
Never!

       *       *       *       *       *

In the evening my good mother-in-law receives me with a manner that is
enigmatic. She casts a searching look at me sideways, as though she
wished to ascertain what sort of impression the stupendous occurrence
had made on me. "You have heard it?" she asks.

"Yes, it is strange--a clap of thunder in November." She at any rate no
longer considers me damned.




XI

HELL LET LOOSE


Meanwhile, in order to entirely bewilder me regarding the real nature
of my illness, a current number of _L'Événement_ contains the following
notice:

"The unhappy Strindberg, who brought his misogyny to Paris, was quickly
compelled to take himself off. Since then his partisans are dumb and
confounded before the feminist flag. They do not wish to undergo the
fate of Orpheus, whose head was torn off by the Thracian Bacchanals."

So they actually did lay a plot against me in the Rue de la Clef,
and the morbid symptoms from which I still suffer are the result of
that murderous attempt. Oh, these women! Certainly my articles on the
feminist pictures of my Danish friend were not calculated to please
them. But, at any rate, here is a fact, a tangible occurrence which
dissipates my terrible doubts regarding my mental soundness.

I hasten with the good news to my mother-in-law. "You see that I am not
out of my mind!"

"No, you are not, but only ill, and the doctor will recommend physical
exercise for you--wood-chopping, for instance."

"Is that of any use against women, or not?"

My too hasty retort makes a breach between us. I had forgotten that a
female saint is still a woman, _i.e._, man's enemy.

       *       *       *       *       *

All is forgotten, the Russians, the Rothschilds, the dabblers in black
magic, the theosophists, and the Eternal Himself. I am the innocent
sacrifice, blameless Job, Orpheus whom the women want to kill, the
author of _Sylva Sylvarum_, the reviver of dead science. Lost in
a labyrinth of doubt, I abandon the new-born idea of providential
interposition with a spiritual purpose, and absorbed in the bare fact
that a plot has been laid against me, I forget to think of the original
Plotter. Thirsting for vengeance, I prepare to send notices to the
police-offices and papers in Paris, when a timely change of affairs
puts an end to the sorry drama, which would have degenerated into a
farce.

One grey-yellow winter day, about an hour after the mid-day meal, my
little Christina insists on following me to my house, where I generally
have my afternoon siesta. I cannot resist her, and give way to her
request, When we get to my room Christina asks for pen and paper; then
she demands picture-books, and I must remain, show, and explain.

"You must not go to sleep, papa!"

Although feeling weary and exhausted, I obey my child, I don't know why
myself, but there is a tone in her voice which I cannot resist.

Outside, before the door, an organ-grinder is playing a waltz tune. I
propose to the little one to dance with the nurse who has accompanied
her. Attracted by the music, the neighbours' children come, the
organ-grinder is invited into the kitchen, and we improvise a dance.
This goes on for an hour, and my sadness is dispelled. In order to
distract myself and to keep off sleep, I take the Bible, my oracle, and
open it at haphazard. "But the spirit of the Lord departed from Saul,
and an evil spirit from the Lord troubled him. And Saul's servants said
unto him, 'Behold now, an evil spirit from God troubleth thee. Let our
lord now command thy servants, which are before thee, to seek out a
man, who is a cunning player on the harp, and it shall come to pass
when the evil spirit from God is upon thee, that he shall play with his
hand, and thou shalt be well.'"

An evil spirit! That is what I am always suspecting! While the children
are dancing, my mother-in-law comes in in order to fetch the little
one, and when she sees them, she stands still, astonished. Then she
tells me that just now, down in the village, a lady of good family has
been seized with an attack of frenzy.

"What is the matter with her?"

"She dances without stopping, has dressed herself as a bride and
fancies she is Burger's Lenore."

"She dances, and then?"

"She weeps in terror of death, who she believes will come and take her."

What lends a darker shade to this tragedy is that the lady has occupied
the same house I live in now, and that her husband died in the same
room where the children are noisily dancing.

Explain me that, O doctors, psychiatrists, psychologists, or
acknowledge the bankruptcy of science!

My little daughter has exorcised the evil spirit who, driven out by
her innocence, has entered into an old lady who used to boast of being
a free thinker.

The death-dance lasts the whole night. The lady is guarded by friends,
who she says, are to ward off the attack of death. She calls it "death"
because she does not believe in the existence of evil spirits. And yet
she often asserted that her deceased husband tormented her.

       *       *       *       *       *

My departure is postponed, but, in order to recruit my strength after
so many sleepless nights, I remove to my aunt's house on the other side
of the street, and leave the "rose-red" room. It is a curious fact that
in the good old times the torture chamber in Sweden was called the
"Chamber of Roses."

At last I spend a night again in a quiet room. The walls are painted
white and covered with pictures of saints. Over my bed hangs a
crucifix. But when night comes the spirits begin their tricks again.

I light the candles in order to kill the time with reading. There is
a weird stillness in which I can hear my heart beating. Then a slight
noise startles me, like an electric spark.

What is that?

A large piece of wax has dropped from the candle on the ground. Nothing
more, but the people here believe it is a sign of death! It may be, as
far as I am concerned. After reading for half an hour, I want to take
my handkerchief from under my pillow. It is not there, and when I look
for it, I find it on the ground. I stoop to pick it up. Something falls
on my head, and when I extricate it from my hair, I find it is another
piece of wax. Instead of being alarmed, I cannot help smiling; the
whole thing seems a piece of practical joking.

Smiling at death! How could that be possible, were not life essentially
comic. Such a fuss about nothing! Perhaps in the depth of our souls
there lurks a shadowy consciousness that everything down here is all
humbug, a masquerade, a mere pretence, and that all our sufferings
afford mirth to the gods.

       *       *       *       *       *

High over the hill on which the castle is built there towers another,
from which a more commanding view over the Inferno-like landscape can
be gained than from any other. The way thither lies through the remains
of an ancient oak forest, which, according to tradition, was a scene
of Druidic worship, and where mistletoe grows luxuriantly on the apple
and lime trees. Above this wood the path mounts steeply through pines.

Several times I have tried to reach the summit, but something
unforeseen has always hindered me. One time it was a deer which broke
the silence with an unexpected leap, another time a hare, which
resembled no hare which I had ever seen, and yet another time a magpie
with its deafening chatter. But on the last morning, the day before
my departure, I pressed in spite of all hindrances through the dark
melancholy pine wood up to the summit, whence I obtained a splendid
view of the valley of the Danube and the Styrian Alps. I breathe
freely for the first time now that I have at last emerged from the
gloomy, funnel-shaped valley below. The sun illuminates the landscape
to the farthest horizon, and the white crests of the Alps melt into
the clouds. The whole scene is one of heavenly beauty. Does the earth
comprise at the same time heaven and hell, and is there no other place
of punishment and reward? Perhaps. Certainly, the most beautiful
moments of my life seem to me heavenly, and the worst, hellish. Has
the future still in reserve for me hours or minutes of that happiness
which can be won only by tribulation and a tolerably clean conscience?

I feel little inclination to descend into the valley of sorrows again,
and walk about on the mountain plateau, wondering at the beauty of
the earth. On the summit is a rock shaped by nature like an Egyptian
Sphinx. On its gigantic head is a heap of stones in which stands a
stick bearing a white piece of linen attached, like a flag. Without
troubling myself about its significance, an uncontrollable desire to
seize the flag takes possession of me. Despising death, I clamber up
the steep rock, and lay hold of it. At the same moment the sound of a
bridal march sung by triumphant voices arises from the Danube below. It
is a marriage party; I cannot see it, but the musket shots customarily
fired on such occasions place it beyond a doubt. Childish enough and
unhappy enough to give a poetical colouring to the most ordinary
occurrences, I take this as a good omen.

Reluctantly and slowly I descend again into the valley of sorrows, of
death, of sleeplessness, and of demons, where my little Beatrice awaits
me and the promised piece of mistletoe, the green branch in the midst
of the snow, which really ought to be cut with a golden sickle.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a long time past the grandmother had expressed a wish to see me,
whether it were to bring about a reconciliation or for occultist
reasons, because she is a clairvoyante and visionary. I had postponed
the visit under various pretexts, but now that my departure was
resolved on, my mother-in-law obliged me to visit the old lady and bid
her farewell, probably for the last time on this side of the grave.
On November 26th, a cold, clear day, my mother-in-law, the child, and
I made the pilgrimage to the bank of the Danube, where the family
residence is. We alighted at the inn, and while my mother-in-law went
to announce my visit to her mother, I wandered through the meadows and
woods, which I had not seen for two years. Recollections overpowered
me, and in all of them was interwoven the figure of my wife. And now
everything is blighted by autumnal frosts; there is now not a single
flower, nor a green blade of grass where we both plucked all the
flowers of spring, summer, and autumn!

After the mid-day meal I am taken to the old lady who occupies the
annex to the villa, the little house in which my child was born. Our
meeting is, considering the circumstances, a cold one; they seem to
expect that I should appear as the prodigal son, but I have no wish
to act that rôle. I confine myself to indulging in reminiscences of
our lost paradise. She and I had painted the door-and window-panels
in honour of the little Christina's arrival in the world. The roses
and clematis which adorn the front of the house were planted by my own
hands. I had cut out the path through the garden. But the walnut tree
which I planted the morning after Christina's birth has disappeared.
The "life-tree," as we called it, is dead. Two years, two eternities,
have elapsed since the farewell between her on the shore and me on the
ship, in which I went to Linz in order to proceed thence to Paris.

Who has caused the breach between us? I, for I have murdered my own
love and hers. Farewell, my white house, where grew thorns and roses.
Farewell, Danube! I say to comfort myself, "You were a dream, short as
summer, too sweet to be real, and I do not regret it."

The night comes. My mother-in-law and my child have, at my request,
taken up their quarters in the inn, in order to protect me against the
deadly attacks, which I forebode by means of a sixth sense which has
been developed in me during the six months of persecution which I have
suffered.

About ten o'clock in the evening a gust of wind begins to shake the
door of my room, which is on the ground-floor. I make it fast with
wooden wedges; it is no use; the door shakes still more. The windows
rattle; there is a dog-like howling in the stove; the whole house reels
like a ship. I cannot sleep; at one time my mother-in-law groans, at
another the child cries. The next morning my mother-in-law, exhausted
by sleeplessness and something else, which she conceals from me, says:
"Depart, my child; I have enough of this hellish stench!" And I travel
northwards, a restless pilgrim, into the fire of a new purgatory.




XII

PILGRIMAGE AND PENANCE


There are ninety towns in Sweden, and the powers have condemned me to
go to the one which I most dislike. First of all, I visit the doctors.
The first speaks of neurasthenia, the second of angina pectoris, the
third of paranoia, a mental disease, the fourth of emphysema. This is
enough to ensure me against being put into a lunatic asylum. Meanwhile,
in order to procure the means of livelihood, I am forced to write
articles for a newspaper. But whenever I sit at the table to write,
hell is let loose. A new discovery comes to make me wild. Whenever I
take up my quarters in an hotel there breaks out a fiendish noise,
just as there did in the Rue de la Grande Chaumière in Paris; I hear
shuffling footsteps and the moving of furniture. I change my room, I
go into another hotel, and still there is the noise over my head. I
visit the restaurants, but as soon as I sit down to a meal the noise
begins there also. And it should be observed that whenever I ask those
present whether they hear the same noise too, they say "yes," and their
description of it tallies with mine.

It is then no acoustic hallucination from which I suffer; everywhere
there are plots, I say to myself. But one day, as I go by chance into a
shoemaker's shop, the noise instantaneously breaks out. It is no plot,
then! It is the Devil himself! Hunted from hotel to hotel, pursued
everywhere by electric wires even to my bed, attacked everywhere
by electric currents which lift me from my chair, or out of bed, I
deliberately set about planning my suicide. The weather is terrible,
and in my depression I seek distraction in drinking bouts with friends.

One dreary day, after such a bout, I have just finished my early
breakfast in my room. I turn round towards the table on which the
breakfast things are standing. A slight noise attracts my attention,
and I see that a knife has fallen on the ground. I lift it up and place
it so that it cannot do so again. The knife moves and falls.

So it is electricity!

The same morning I write a letter to my mother-in-law, and complain
of the bad weather and life in general. As I write the sentence,
"The earth is dirty, the sea is dirty, and dirt rains from the sky,"
imagine my astonishment, as I see a clear drop of water fall upon the
paper. No electricity! A miracle! In the evening as I am still working
at the table, a noise from the washing-stand startles me. I look in
that direction, and see that a wax-cloth, which I use in my morning
ablutions, has fallen down. In order to get at the rights of the
matter, I hang it up, so that it cannot fall down again.

It falls again!

What is that? My thoughts now revert to the occultists and their secret
powers. I leave the town with my written indictment of them in my
pocket, and betake myself to Lund, where there are old friends of mine:
doctors, specialists in mental disease, and even theosophists on whose
aid I reckon.

How have I come to settle down in this little university town, this
place of rustication and penance for the students of Upsala, when they
have lived too freely at the cost of their purses and their health?
Is this my Canossa, where I must retract my false doctrines before
the same set of youths who between 1880 and 1890 regarded me as their
standard-bearer? I understand my position exactly, and know well that
I am under the ban of most of the professors as a seducer of youth, and
that the fathers and mothers fear me like the Evil One himself.

Moreover, I have made personal enemies here, and have contracted debts
under circumstances which set my character in a dubious light. Here
Popoffsky's sister-in-law and her husband live, and both of these, who
have an influential position in society, are able to stir up powerful
enemies against me. I have also here relations who ignore me, and
friends who have left me to become my enemies. In a word, it is the
worst place I could have chosen for a quiet residence; it is hell, but
a hell contrived with masterly logic and divine ingenuity. Here I must
drain the cup of humiliation, and reconcile the youth of Lund with the
alienated powers. By a picturesque accident, I buy myself a mantle with
cape and cowl, of a flea-brown colour, like a Franciscan's. Thus, after
a six years' banishment, I return to Sweden in a penitent's costume.

About the year 1885 there was formed in Lund a Students' Association
called "The Old Boys," whose literary, scientific, and social programme
was best expressed by the word "Radicalism." It was coloured by
modern ideas; it was first socialistic, then nihilistic, and tended
finally to a general dissolution of society. It had besides a fin de
siècle flavouring of Satanism and decadence. The head of that party,
the most conspicuous of their champions, a friend of mine, whom I
have not seen for three years, pays me a visit. Dressed like myself
in a monkish-looking mantle of a grey colour, grown old, lean, with
melancholy aspect, he shows his history in his face.

"You also?" I ask him.

"Yes! It is all up with us."

On my inviting him to take a glass of wine, he declares himself a
teetotaller.

"How are the 'Old Boys'?" I ask.

"Dead, come croppers, turned into Philistines and steady members of
society."

"It is a case of Canossa, then!"

"Canossa all along the line."

"Then it is Providence Itself which has brought me here."

"Providence! That is the right word."

"Do they know the 'powers' in Lund?"

"The 'powers' are preparing to return."

"Do people sleep well here?"

"No; they complain of nightmares, constrictions of the breast and
heart."

"My arrival is appropriate, then; for that is precisely my case."

We talk for some hours over the strange times we are living in, and my
friend relates to me some extraordinary occurrences which have recently
happened. Finally, he gives a brief account of the minds of the present
young generation, who are looking out for something new.

People want a religion; a reconciliation with the "powers" (that is the
phrase), a new approach to the invisible. The fruitful and important
epoch of naturalism is past. One cannot say anything against it, nor
regret it, for the powers willed that we should pass through it. It was
an experimental epoch, the negative results of which have disproved
certain theories when they were put to the test. A God, unknown at
present, seems to be developing, growing, and revealing Himself from
time to time. In the intervals, so it seems, He leaves the world to
itself, like the farmer, who lets the tares and wheat grow together
till the harvest. Each epoch of revelation shows Him animated with
new ideas, and practically improving His methods. Thus Religion will
return, but under new aspects, for a compromise with the old religions
seems impossible. We do not await an epoch of reaction, nor a return
to out-worn ideals, but an advance towards something new. But of what
sort? Let us wait!

At the end of our conversation a question escapes my lips like an arrow
which flies sky-wards, "Do you know Swedenborg?"

"No; but my mother has his works, and has found wonderful things in
them."

From atheism to Swedenborg is only a step!

I beg him to lend me Swedenborg's works, and my friend, that Saul among
the young prophets, brings me the _Arcana Cœlestia_. Moreover, he
introduces a young man to me who has been highly gifted by the powers.
The latter relates to me events in his life which only too closely
resemble my own. When we compare our trials, we find a new light thrown
upon them, and we gain deliverance by the help of Swedenborg. I thank
Providence which has sent me into this small despised town to expiate
my sin and to be delivered.




XIII

THE DELIVERER


When Balzac introduced me to my noble countryman, "The Buddha of the
North," by means of his book _Séraphita_, he showed me the evangelistic
side of the Prophet. Now it is the Law which encounters, crushes, and
releases.

A single word suffices to illuminate my soul, and to scatter my doubts
and vain fancies regarding supposed enemies, electricians, black magic,
etc., and this single word is "Devastation."[1] All my sufferings I
find described by Swedenborg--the feelings of suffocation (angina
pectoris), constrictions of the chest, palpitations, the sensation
which I called the "electric girdle"--all exactly correspond, and
these phenomena, taken together, constitute the spiritual catharsis
(purification) which was already known to St. Paul, "Whom," he says
speaking of someone, "I have determined to hand over to Satan for the
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit might be saved in the day of
the Lord Jesus," and "Among whom are Hymenæus and Alexander, whom I
have delivered over to Satan, that they may be taught not to blaspheme."

When I read the visions of Swedenborg belonging to the year 1744, the
year preceding his establishment of relations with the spiritual world,
I discover that the Prophet has endured the same nightly tortures as I
have, and what astonishes me still more is the complete identity of the
symptoms, which leave me no longer room for doubting the real nature of
my illness. In the _Arcana Cœlestia_, the mysterious occurrences of
the last two years are explained with such convincing exactness, that
I, a child of the renowned nineteenth century, am firmly convinced that
there is a hell--a hell, however, on earth, and that I have just come
out of it.

Swedenborg explains to me the reason of my detention in the Hospital
St. Louis thus:

"Alchemists are attacked by leprosy and scratch the scurf off like
fish-scales. It is an incurable skin disease." The apparition of the
chimney sweep which my daughter saw in Austria is also explained:
"Among the spirits, there is a kind called 'chimney sweeps,' because
they actually have faces blackened by smoke, and seem to wear
soot-coloured clothes.... One of these 'chimney sweep' spirits came
to me, and begged me earnestly to pray for his admission into heaven.
'I don't think,' he said, 'I have done anything on account of which I
should be excluded. I have often rebuked the inhabitants of earth, but
after rebuke and punishment, I have always given them instruction.'

"The chastising, reforming, or instructing spirits approach a man from
the left side, lean on his back, consult his book of memory, and read
his deeds and even his thoughts in it. For when a spirit enters a man,
he first of all takes possession of his memory. If they behold an evil
deed or the intention to commit one, they punish him with a pain in the
foot or in the hand, or the neighbourhood of the stomach, and they do
this with unexampled dexterity. A shudder announces their approach.

"Besides inflicting pains in the limbs, they employ a painful pressure
against the navel, which gives the sensation of being surrounded with
a prickly girdle; moreover, they sometimes cause constrictions of
the chest, which they intensify to a terrible degree; finally, they
inspire a disgust of all food except bread, which continues for days.

"Other spirits try to convince their victims of the opposite to that
which the instructing spirits have said. These spirits of contradiction
were, during their earthly existence, men who had been expelled from
society on account of some crime. Their approach is heralded by a
flickering flame, which seems to hover about one's face; their place is
above the back, whence they make themselves felt to the extremities."
(These flickering flames or sparks have appeared to me twice, and both
times on occasions when I resisted my better self, and rejected all
apparitions as idle dreams.)

"These spirits of contradiction tell men not to believe what the
instructing spirits have been commissioned by the angels to say,
and not to rule their lives accordingly, but to live in all licence
and wantonness as they choose. Usually the former come as soon as
the latter have gone. Men know what to expect from them, and do not
trouble much about them, but they learn through their assaults to
distinguish between good and evil. For the knowledge of good is first
gained through that of its opposite, just as every perception or idea
of a matter is obtained by carefully observing what distinguishes it
from its contrary." The reader may remember the faces like antique
sculptures which I saw formed by the white cover of my pillow in the
Hôtel Orfila. Swedenborg speaks regarding them as follows:

"Two signs show that they (the spirits) dwell with a man; one is an old
man with a white face. This sign will signify to him that he is always
to speak the truth, and to act justly.... I myself have seen such an
antique human face. There are faces of pure whiteness and great beauty,
from which uprightness and modesty beam."

(In order not to alarm the reader, I have purposely concealed the fact,
that all the above relates to the inhabitants of the planet Jupiter.
My surprise may be imagined when one spring morning they bring me a
French review containing a picture of Swedenborg's house in the planet
Jupiter, drawn by Victorien Sardou. Why on Jupiter? What a remarkable
coincidence! And has the master and doyen of the Théâtre Français
observed that the left façade of the building seen from a sufficient
distance forms an antique human face? This face is the same as that
which was formed by my cushion-cover.
But in Sardou's drawing there are more of such silhouettes formed by
the lines of the building. Has the master's hand been guided by another
hand, so that he produced more than he knew?)

Where has Swedenborg seen his heaven and hell? Are they visions,
intuitions, inspirations? I hardly know, but the correspondence of his
hell to that of Dante, and of the Greek, Roman, and German mythologies,
leads to the idea that the powers have generally used similar means to
realise their purposes. And what are these purposes? The completion
of the human type; the production of the higher Man--the Superman, as
Nietzsche, that rod of chastisement prematurely used and cast into the
fire, has announced him. So the problem of good and evil is again set
up for us to solve, and Taine's moral indifference seems insipid before
these new demands.

The belief in spirits follows as a natural consequence. What are
spirits? As soon as we admit the immortality of the soul, we see that
the dead are still alive and continue their relationships with the
living. "Evil spirits," then, are not evil, for their object is good,
and it would be better to call them, with Swedenborg, "corrective
spirits," than to abandon oneself to fear and to despair. Accordingly,
there exists no Satan, as an autonomous personality opposed to God,
and the undeniable apparitions of the Evil One in his traditional form
must be regarded as a scarecrow conjured up by Providence--Providence
the Supreme and Good, which carries on its government by means of an
enormous comprehensive staff, consisting of departed souls.

Be comforted, and be proud of the grace bestowed upon you, all ye who
suffer from sleeplessness, nightmares, apparitions, palpitations, and
fears of death! _Numen adest!_ God is seeking for you!


[1] According to Swedenborg the name of a stage in the religious life.




XIV

TRIBULATIONS


Interned in this little university town, without hope of getting out
of it, I engage in the terrible fight against my worst enemy--myself.
Every morning, when I go for a walk on the wall under the plane trees,
the large red lunatic asylum reminds me of the danger I have escaped,
and of that which still awaits me, if I relapse. Swedenborg, by
explaining to me the true character of my terrors during the last year,
has delivered me from the fear of electricians, "black" magicians,
wizards, the ambition of the gold-maker, and from madness. He has
pointed out the only way to salvation: to seek out the demons in their
dens within myself, and there to slay them by--repentance. Balzac,
the Prophet's assistant, has taught me in _Séraphita_ that "Pain of
conscience is a weakness which does not put an end to sin; repentance
is the only power which makes a decisive end of all." Very well,
let us repent! But is not that equivalent to criticising Providence,
which has chosen me for its scourge? and to saying to the powers: "You
have guided my destiny ill; you have made me and commissioned me to
chastise, to overthrow idols, to stir up revolt, and then you withdraw
your protection from me and disown me in an absurd way, telling me to
creep to the cross and repent!"

Strange "circulus vitiosus," which I already foresaw in my twentieth
year, when I wrote my drama _Meister Olaf_, and which has constituted
the tragedy of my life. Why be tormented during thirty years in order
to be taught by experience what one had already foreboded? When young
I was sincerely pious, and you have made me a freethinker. Out of
the freethinker you have made an atheist, and out of the atheist a
religious man. Inspired by humanitarian ideas, I have been a herald
of socialism. Five years later, you have shown me the absurdity of
socialism; you have made all my prophecies futile. And supposing I
become again religious, I am sure that, in another ten years, you will
reduce religion to an absurdity.

Ah! what a game the gods play with us poor mortals! And therefore,
in the most tormented moments of life, we too can laugh with
self-conscious raillery.

How is it that you wish us to take earnestly what is nothing but a huge
bad joke?

For whom was Christ the Saviour? Consider the most Christian of all
Christians, our pious Scandinavians, these amæmic, wretched, timid
creatures, who look as though they were possessed. They seem to carry
an evil spirit in their hearts, and observe how most of their leaders
have ended in prison as criminals. Why has their master delivered them
over to the enemy? Is religion a punishment, and Christ an Avenger?

       *       *       *       *       *

The sun shines, everyday life proceeds on its usual course, the
cheerful bustle of business raises the spirits. Then one feels
rebellious, and challenges heaven with doubts. But when night, silence,
and loneliness reign, the heart beats, and the breast suffers from
constriction. Then one jumps out of window into a hedge of thorns,
and humbly begs a physician for help, and seeks someone to share the
sleeping chamber.

Go again into your room, and you will find someone is there; he is
invisible, but you feel his presence. Then go to the asylum, and ask
the doctor; he will talk to you about neurasthenia, paranoia, angina
pectoris, and stories of that kind, but will never heal you. Whither,
then, will you go, all ye who, sleepless, wander through street after
street, waiting for the dawn? "The mills of the universe," "The mills
of God," are two expressions in common use. Have you had that roaring
in your ears which is like the noise of a water-wheel? Have you in
the solitude of night or in broad daylight observed how memories of
the past stir and arise, singly or in groups? Memories of all your
faults, crimes, and follies which make your ears tingle, your brows
perspire, your spine shudder? You re-live your life from your birth
to the present day, you suffer over again all the sorrows you have
endured; you empty again all the cups which you have drunk to the dregs
so often; you crucify your skeleton when there is no more flesh left to
crucify; you consume your soul when your heart is reduced to ashes!

You know all that?

Those are the "mills of God" which grind slowly but exceeding small.
You are ground to powder, and think it is over. But no! You are brought
again to the mill. Be thankful! That is hell upon earth, as Luther knew
it, and reckoned it a special grace to be pulverised on this side of
the grave.

Think yourself happy and be thankful!

What is one to do then? Humble oneself?

If you humble yourself before men, you will arouse their pride, for all
will think themselves, no matter how guilty they may be, better than
you.

Well, then, is one to humble oneself before God? But is it not
disgraceful to degrade the Highest by conceiving of Him as the overseer
of a slave plantation?

Shall we pray? What! Presume to try to alter the will and decision
of the Eternal by flattery and crawling? I look for God and find the
Devil! That is my destiny! I have repented and reformed myself.

       *       *       *       *       *

I renounce alcohol, and come about nine o'clock soberly home to drink
milk. The room is filled with all kinds of demons, who drag me out of
bed and try to stifle me under the blankets. But if I come home at
midnight intoxicated, I sleep like an angel and wake up strong as a
young god, and ready to work like a galley-slave.

I live a chaste life, and am troubled by unwholesome dreams. I accustom
myself to think only good of my friends, entrust my secrets and my
money to them, and am betrayed. If I show offence at such treachery, it
is always I who am punished.

I try to love mankind in the mass; I shut my eyes to their faults,
and with inexhaustible patience endure their meanesses and slanders,
and one fine day I find myself a sharer of their crimes. Whenever
I withdraw from society which I consider injurious, the demons of
solitude attack me, and when I look for better friends, I come on the
track of the worst. Yes, after I have conquered my evil inclinations
and through loneliness have attained to a certain degree of inward
peace, I am caught in the snare of self-satisfaction and despising
my neighbour. And self-conceit is the deadliest of sins, which is
instantly punished.

How is one to explain the fact that every step of progress in virtue
gives rise to a fresh sin?

Swedenborg solves the puzzle by declaring that sins are punishments
inflicted on men in requital for sins of the more heinous class.
Thus those who are greedy of power are condemned to the hell of the
Sodomites. Supposing this theory to be true, we must endure the
burden of our wickedness and rejoice at the pangs of conscience
which accompany it, as at the payment of fees at a toll-gate. To seek
virtue, accordingly, resembles an attempt to escape from prison and its
punishments. That is what Luther asserts in article xxix. against the
Romish bull, when he declares that "souls in purgatory sin continually,
because they seek for peace, and try to avoid torments." Similarly,
in article xxxiv., he says, "To fight with the Turks is equivalent to
rebellion against God, whose instrument the Turks are, in order to
punish our sins." It is therefore obvious "that all our good works are
deadly sins," and that "the world must become guilty before God, and
learn that no one is justified except through grace."

Let us therefore suffer without hoping for any real joy in life, for,
my brothers, we are in hell. And do not let us accuse the Lord, when we
see our little innocent children suffer. No one knows why, but divine
justice gives us a ground for surmising that it is on account of sins
committed by them before their birth. Let us rejoice in our torments,
as though they were the paying off of so many debts, and let us count
it a mercy that we do not know the real reason why we are punished.




XV

WHITHER?


Six months have passed, and I still go daily walking on the city wall
and survey the lunatic asylum, and catch glimpses of the blue sea in
the distance. Thence will the new epoch, the new religion, come of
which the world is dreaming.

Gloomy winter is buried, the meadows are green, the trees are in
blossom, the nightingale sings in the garden of the observatory, but
a wintry sadness still weighs upon our spirits, for so many weird and
inexplicable things have happened, that even the most incredulous
waver. The general sleeplessness increases, nervous breakdowns are
common, apparitions are matters of every day, and real miracles happen.
People are expecting something.

       *       *       *       *       *

A young man pays me a visit, and asks, "What must one do in order to
sleep quietly at night?"

"Why?"

"Upon my word, I cannot say, but my bed-room has become a terror to me,
and I give it up to-morrow."

"Young man, atheist, naturalist, why?"

"The Devil must be in it! When I open the door of my room at night and
enter, someone seizes me by the arms and shakes me."

"Then there is someone in your room?"

"No, when I light a candle there is no one to be seen."

"Young man, there is someone who cannot be seen by candle-light!"

"Who is that?"

"The invisible, young man! Have you taken sulphonal, bromkali,
morphium, chloral?"

"I have tried all."

"And the invisible does not quit the field. Very well! You want to
sleep at night, and wish me to tell you how. Listen, young man, I
am neither a physician nor a prophet, I am an old sinner, who does
penance. Demand therefore neither preaching nor prophecy from an old
gallows-bird, who wants all his leisure time to preach to himself. I
have also suffered from sleeplessness and paralysis of the arms; I have
wrestled eye to eye with the invisible, and finally recovered sleep and
health. Do you know how? Guess!"

The young man guesses my meaning, and casts his eyes down. "You guess
it! Go in peace, and sleep well!"

Yes! I must be silent and let my meaning be guessed, for if I began to
play the preaching monk, they would turn their backs on me at once.

       *       *       *       *       *

A friend asks me, "Whither are we going?"

"I cannot say, but as regards myself personally, it seems that the way
of the Cross leads me back to the faith of my fathers."

"To Catholicism?"

It appears so. Occultism has played its part, by giving a scientific
explanation of miracles and demonology. Theosophy, the forerunner
of religion, has fulfilled its function, when it has revived belief
in a world-order which punishes and rewards, Karma will be replaced
by God, and the Mahatmas will be revealed as the new-born powers,
the chastising and instructing spirits. Buddhism in Young France has
preached renunciation of the world and the worship of sorrow, which
leads direct to Golgotha.

As regards the homesick longing I feel for the bosom of the Mother
Church, that is a long story, which I may summarise as follows:

When Swedenborg taught me that it is unlawful to quit the religion of
one's ancestors, he said that with reference to Protestantism, which is
treason against the Mother Church. Or, to put it better, Protestantism
is a punishment inflicted on the barbarians of the North. Protestantism
is the Exile, the Babylonish Captivity, but the Return seems near, the
Return to the promised land. The immense progress which Catholicism
makes in America, England, and Scandinavia seems to point towards a
great reconciliation, in which the Greek Church, which has already
stretched out her hand towards the West, is not to be forgotten.

That is the dream of the socialists regarding the restoration of the
United States of the West, but taken in a spiritual sense. But I beg
you not to think that it is a political theory which takes me back
to the Roman Church. I have not sought Catholicism; it has found a
place in me, after following me for years. My child, who became a
Catholic against my will, has shown me the beauty of a cult which has
maintained itself unaltered from the first, and I have always preferred
the original to the copy. The considerable time I spent in my child's
native country gave me opportunity to observe and admire the sincerity
of the religious life there. I have been also influenced by my stay
in the St. Louis Hospital, and finally by the occurrences of the last
few weeks. After contemplating my life, which has whirled me round
like some of the damned in Dante's hell, and after discovering that my
existence in general had no other object but to humble and to defile
me, I determined to anticipate my executioner, and take in hand my
own torture. I determined to live in the midst of sufferings, dirt,
and death-agonies, and with this object I prepared to seek a post as
attendant on the sick in the Hôpital des Frères St. Jean de Dieu in
Paris. This idea occurred to me on the morning of April 29th, after
I had met an old woman with a head resembling a skull. When I return
home, I find _Séraphita_ lying open on my table, and on the right page
a splinter of wood, which points to the following sentence: "Do for God
what you would do for your own ambitious plans, what you do when you
devote yourself to your art, what you have done when you love someone
more than Him, or when you have investigated a secret of science! Is
God not Science Itself?..."

In the afternoon the newspaper _L'Éclair_ arrived, and, strange to say,
the Hôpital des Frères St. Jean de Dieu is twice mentioned in it.

On May 1st I read for the first time in my life Sar Peladan's _Comment
on devient un Mage_.

Sar Peladan, hitherto unknown to me, overcomes me like a storm, a
revelation of the higher man, Nietzsche's Superman, and with him
Catholicism makes its solemn and victorious entry into my life.

Has "He who should come" come already in the person of Sar Peladan. The
Poet-Thinker-Prophet--is it _he_, or do we wait for another?

I know not, but after I have passed through these antechambers of a new
life, I begin on May 3rd to write this book.

_May_ 5_th_.--A Catholic priest, a convert, visited me.

_May_ 9_th_.--I saw the figure of Gustavus Adolphus in the ashes of the
stove.

On May 14th I read in Sar Peladan: "About the year 1000 A.D. it was
possible to believe in witchcraft; to-day, as the year 2000 A.D.
approaches, it is an established fact that such and such an individual
has the fatal peculiarity of bringing trouble to those who come into
collision with him. You deny him a request, and your dearest friend
deceives you; you strike him, and illness makes you keep your bed;
all the harm you do to him recoils on you in twofold measure. But, say
people, that signifies nothing; 'chance' can explain these inexplicable
coincidences. Modern determinism sums itself up in the expression
'chance.'"

On May 17th I read what the Dane, Jorgensen, a convert to Catholicism,
says about the Beuron convent.

On May 18th a friend whom I have not seen for six years comes to Lund,
and takes a room in the house where I am staying. Who can picture
my emotion when I learn that he also has just been converted to
Catholicism? He lends me his breviary (I had lost mine a year ago), and
as I read again the Latin hymns and chants, I feel myself once more at
home.

_May_ 21_th_.--After a series of conversations regarding the Mother
Church, my friend has written a letter to the Belgian convent, where he
was baptised, requesting them to find a place of refuge for the author
of this book.

_May_ 28_th_.--There is a vague rumour in circulation that Mrs. Annie
Besant has become a Catholic.

       *       *       *       *       *

I am waiting the answer from the Belgian convent. By the time this
book is printed, the answer will have arrived. And then? After that? A
new joke for the gods, who laugh heartily when we shed bitter tears.

Lund, _May_ 3_rd_-_June_ 25_th_, 1897.

[_Translator's Note_.--Strindberg never actually entered the Roman
Church.]




EPILOGUE


I had finished this book with the exclamation, "What humbug! What
wretched humbug life is!" But after some reflection I found the
sentiment unworthy, and struck it out. My mind swayed irresolute, and
at last I took refuge in the Bible, to find the explanation I needed.
And thus the Holy Book, more inspired with prophetic qualities than any
other, answered me: "And I will set my face against that man, and will
make him a sign and a proverb, and I will cut him off from the midst of
my people, and ye shall know that I am the Lord. And if that prophet
be deceived, I the Lord have deceived that prophet, and I will stretch
out my hand upon him, and will destroy him from the midst of my people
Israel."--Ezek. xiv., 8, 9.

Such then is my life; a sign, an example to serve for the betterment
of others; a proverb to set forth the nothingness of fame and of
celebrity; a proverb to show the younger generation how they should not
live; yes! I am a proverb, I who regarded myself as a prophet, and am
revealed as a braggart. Now the Eternal has led this false prophet to
speak empty words, and the false prophet feels irresponsible since he
has only played the rôle assigned to him.

Here you have, my brothers, the picture of a human destiny, one among
so many, and now confess that a man's life may seem--a bad joke!

THE GERMAN LIEUTENANT




CHAPTER I


It was fourteen days after Sedan, in the middle of September, 1870. A
former clerk in the Prussian Geological Survey, later a lieutenant in
the reserve, named Von Bleichroden, sat in his shirt-sleeves before a
writing-table in the Café du Cercle, the best inn of the little town
Marlotte. He had thrown his military coat with its stiff collar over
the back of a chair, and there it hung limp, and collapsed like a
corpse, with its empty arms seeming to clutch at the legs of the chair
to keep itself from falling headlong. Round the body of the coat one
saw the mark of the sword-belt, and the left coat-tail was rubbed quite
smooth by the sheath. The back of the coat was as dusty as a high-road,
and the lieutenant-geologist might have studied the tertiary deposits
of the district on the edges of his much-worn trousers. When the
orderlies came into the room with their dirty boots, he could till by
the traces they left on the floor whether they had been walking over
Eocene or Pleiocene formations. He was really more a geologist than a
soldier, but for the present he was a letter-writer. He had pushed his
spectacles up to his forehead, sat with his pen at rest, and looked out
of the window.

The garden lay in all its autumn glory before him, and the branches of
the apple and pear trees bent with a load of the most splendid fruit to
the ground. Orange-red pumpkins sunned themselves close beside prickly
grey-green artichokes; fiery-red tomatoes clambered up sticks near
wool-white cauliflowers; sun-flowers as large as a plate were turning
their yellow disks towards the west, where the sun was beginning to
sink; whole companies of dahlias, white as fresh-starched linen,
purple-red like congealed blood, dirty-red like fresh-slaughtered
flesh, salmon-red, sulphur-yellow, flax-coloured, mottled and speckled,
sang one great flower-concert. Then there was the sand-strewn path
lined by two rows of giant gilly-flowers; faintly lilac-coloured,
dazzlingly ice-blue, and straw-yellow, they continued the perspective
to where the vineyards stood in their brownish-green array, a small
wood of thyrsus-staves with the reddened grape-clusters half hidden
under the leaves. Behind them were the whitening, unharvested stalks
of the cornfields, with the over-ripe ears of corn hanging sorrowfully
towards the ground, with wide-open husks and bractlets at every gust of
wind paying their tribute to the earth and bursting with their juices.
And far in the background were the oak-tree tops and the beechen arches
of the Forest of Fontainebleau, whose outlines melted away into the
finest denticulations, like old Brussels lace, into the extreme meshes
of which the horizontal rays of the evening sun wove gold threads. Some
bees were still visiting the splendid honey-flowers in the garden; a
robin-redbreast twittered in an apple tree; strong gusts of scent came
now and then from the gilly-flowers, as when one walks along a pavement
and the door of a scent-shop is opened.

The lieutenant sat with his pen at rest, visibly entranced by the
beautiful scene. "What a lovely land!" he thought, and his recollection
went back to the sandy plain of his home, diversified by some wretched
stunted firs which stretched their gnarled arms towards the sky as
though they implored the favour of not having to drown in the sand.

But the beautiful landscape which was framed in the window was shadowed
as regularly as clockwork by the musket of the sentry, whose bright,
shining bayonet bisected the picture, and who turned on his rounds
exactly under a pear tree heavily laden with the finest yellow-green
Napoleon pears.

The lieutenant thought for a moment of asking him to choose another
beat, but did not venture to do so; so in order to escape the flash of
the bayonet, he let his gaze wander to the left over the courtyard.
There stood the cook-house with its yellow-plastered wall, and an old
knotty vine spread out against it like the skeleton of some animal in a
museum; the vine was without leaves or clusters, and it stood there as
though crucified, nailed fast to the decaying espalier, stretching out
its long tough arms and fingers as though it wished to draw the sentry
into its ghostly embrace as he turned.

The lieutenant turned away and looked at his writing-table. There lay
the unfinished letter to his young wife whom he had married four months
previously, two months before the war broke out. Beside his field-glass
and the list of the French General Staff lay Hartmann's "Philosophy
of the Unconscious" and Schopenhauer's "Parerga and Paralipomena."
Suddenly he rose from the table and walked up and down the room. It
had been the meeting and dining-room of the artists' colony which had
now vanished. The wainscoting of the walls was adorned with little
oil-paintings recording happy hours in the beautiful hospitable country
which so generously opened its art-schools and its exhibitions to
foreigners. Here were depicted Spanish dancing-women, Roman monks,
scenes from the coasts of Normandy and Brittany, Dutch wind-mills,
Scandinavian fishing-villages and Swiss Alps. Into one corner had crept
an easel of walnut-wood, and seemed to be hiding itself in the shadow
from some threatening bayonets. A palette smeared with half-dried
colours hung there and looked like a liver hanging in a pork-shop. Some
red Spanish militia caps belonging to the painters, with the colour
half faded by exposure to the sun and rain, hung on the clothes-horse.

The lieutenant felt embarrassed, like one who has intruded into a
stranger's house, and expects the owner to come and surprise him. He
therefore abruptly ceased walking up and down and took his seat at the
table in order to continue his letter. He had finished the first pages,
which were full of expressions of his sorrow, home-sickness and anxiety
since he had lately heard news which confirmed his joyful hopes of
becoming a father. He dipped his pen in the ink rather in order to have
someone to talk with than to give or ask for news. He wrote as follows:


"So, for example, when I with my hundred men after a march of
fourteen hours without food or water, came to a wood where we found
an abandoned provision-wagon, what do you think happened? So famished
that their eyes protruded from their heads like mountain crystals in
granite, the body of men broke up and threw themselves like wolves upon
the food, and since there was scarcely enough for twenty-five, they
came to blows. No one listened to my word of command, and when the
sergeant struck them with the flat of his sabre, they knocked him down
with the butt-ends of their muskets. Sixteen men remained wounded and
half dead on the place. Those who got hold of the food ate so greedily
that they became sick and had to lie down on the ground, where they
at once fell asleep. They fought with their own countrymen like wild
beasts who fight for food.

"One day we received orders to throw up defences. In the unwooded tract
of country we were in there was nothing to use but the vines and their
stakes. It was a strange sight to see how the vineyards were rifled in
an hour--how the vine-stems were torn up, together with the leaves and
grapes, to form faggot-bundles, which were quite wet with the juice of
the crushed, half-ripe grapes. It was said that the vines were forty
years old. Thus we destroyed the work of forty years in an hour. And
that too in order to shoot down those who had provided the material for
the faggot-bundles which protected us!

"Another day we had to skirmish in an unreaped field of corn where
the ears of corn dropped round our feet like hail and the stalks were
trodden down to rot at the next shower of rain. Do you think, my dear
wife, that one can sleep quietly at night after such doings? And yet,
what have I done but my duty? And people venture to assert that the
consciousness of duty performed is the best pillow for one's head.

"But there are still worse things behind. You have perhaps heard
that the French population in order to strengthen their army have
risen in a mass and formed bodies of volunteers, who, under the
name of 'franc-tireurs,' try to protect their farms and fields. The
Prussian Government has refused to recognise them as soldiers, but
has threatened to have them shot down as spies and traitors whenever
they are found; because, they say, it is states who wage war and not
individuals. But are soldiers not individuals? And are not these
franc-tireurs soldiers? They have a grey uniform like the chasseur
regiments, and uniforms make soldiers. But it is objected that they are
not registered. No, they are not registered, because the Government has
neither had time to have it done nor are means of communication with
the country districts so easy as to make it possible. I have just got
three of these franc-tireurs prisoners in the billiard-room, and am
every moment expecting orders from headquarters to decide their fate."


Here he stopped writing, and rang for his orderly.

The latter, who was in waiting in the tap-room, at once appeared in the
dining-room before the lieutenant.

"How are the prisoners going on?" asked Von Bleichroden.

"Very well, sir; they are just now playing billiards, and are quite
cheerful."

"Give them some bottles of wine, but of the weakest kind. Has nothing
happened?"

"Nothing, sir."

Von Bleichroden continued his letter.


"What strange people these Frenchmen are! The three franc-tireurs
whom I have just mentioned, and who possibly (I say possibly for I
still hope for the best) may be condemned to death in a few days, are
just now playing billiards in the room next to mine and I hear their
cues striking the balls. What happy contempt of the world! It is really
splendid to go hence in such a mood; or rather, it shows that life is
worth very little if one can part from it so easily--I mean when one
has not such dear ties binding one to existence as I possess. Of course
you won't misunderstand me and believe that I think I am tied Ah! I
don't know what I am writing, for I have not slept for several nights
and my head is so----"


Just then there was a knock at the door.

At the lieutenant's "Come in!" the door opened and the curé of the
village entered. He was a man of about fifty, with a friendly and
melancholy yet firm expression of face.

"I come, sir," he began, "to ask you for permission to speak with the
prisoners."

The lieutenant rose and put on his coat, while he offered the curé a
seat on the sofa. But when he had buttoned up the coat tightly and
felt the stiff collar close round his neck, it seemed as though his
nobler organs were compressed, and as though his blood stood still
in coursing through secret channels to his heart. Placing his hand
on the copy of Schopenhauer, and leaning against the writing-table,
he said: "I am at your service, Monsieur le Curé, but I do not think
the prisoners will pay you much attention, for they are busy playing
billiards."

"I think, sir," answered the curé, "that I know my people better than
you do. One question. Do you intend to have these young fellows shot?"

"Naturally," answered Von Bleichroden, quite prepared to assume
his rôle. "It is the states which wage war, Monsieur le Curé, not
individuals."

"Pardon me, sir, are you and your soldiers not individuals?"

"Pardon me, Monsieur, not for the present." He slipped the letter to
his wife under the blotting-paper and continued, "I am just now only a
representative of the German Confederation of States."

"But, sir, your amiable Empress, whom may God ever protect, was also
a representative of the German Confederation when she issued her
proclamation to German women to help the wounded, and I know of
hundreds of individual Frenchmen who bless her, although the French
nation curses your nation. Sir, in the name of Jesus the Redeemer"
(here the curé stood up, seized his enemy's hands and continued in a
tear-choked voice), "could you not appeal to her?"

The lieutenant was nearly losing his self-control, but he recovered
himself and said: "With us women have not yet begun to interfere in
politics."

"That is a pity," answered the priest, and stood up.

The lieutenant seemed to have heard a noise through the window, so that
he did not pay attention to the priest's answer. He became restless,
and his face was quite white, for the stiff collar could no longer
prevent the blood quitting it.

"Pray sit down, Monsieur," he said. "If you wish to speak with the
prisoners, you can do so, but remain sitting for a minute." (He
listened out of the window again, and now there were heard distinctly
doubled hoof-beats, as of a horse galloping.) "No, don't go, Monsieur,"
he said with a gasp. The sound of galloping came nearer till it became
a walk, slackened and ceased. There was the clinking of a sword and
spurs, footsteps, and Von Bleichroden held a letter in his hand. He
tore it open and read it.

"What is the time?" he asked himself. "Six! In two hours, Monsieur, the
prisoners will be shot without trial."

"Impossible, sir! One does not so hurry men into eternity."

"Eternity or not, the order says that it must be done before vespers,
if I do not wish to regard myself as making common cause with the
franc-tireurs. And here there follows a sharp reprimand because I have
not carried out the order of August 31st. Monsieur, go in and talk with
them and spare me the unpleasantness."

"You think it unpleasant to report a righteous sentence?"

"But I am still a man, Monsieur! Don't you think I am a man?"

He tore open his coat to get air, and began to walk up and down the
room.

"Why cannot we be always men? Why must we have two faces? Oh, Monsieur,
go in and talk with them! Are they married men? Have they wives and
children--parents perhaps?"

"They are all three unmarried," answered the priest. "But at any rate
you might let them have this one night."

"Impossible! The order says, 'before vespers,' and we have to march at
daybreak. Go to them, Monsieur, go to them!"

"I will go; but remember, Mr Lieutenant, not to go out in your
shirt-sleeves, when you go, or you might meet with the same fate as
they. For it is the coat, you know, which makes the soldier."

And the priest went.

Von Bleichroden wrote the last lines of his letter in a state of great
agitation. Then he sealed it and rang for the orderly.

"Post this letter," he said to him, "and send in the sergeant."

The sergeant came.

"Three times three is twenty-nine--no, three times seven is. Sergeant,
take three times--take seven-and-twenty men and shoot the prisoners
within an hour. Here is the order!"

"Shoot them?" asked the sergeant hesitatingly.

"Yes, shoot them! Choose the worst soldiers, those who have been under
fire before. You understand? For instance, number 86, Besel, number
19, Gewehr, and so on. Order also for me a fatigue-party of sixteen
men at once, and choose the best. We will make a reconnaissance
towards Fontainebleau, and when we come back it will be over. Do you
understand?"

"Sixteen men for you, air, and seven-and-twenty for the prisoners. God
protect you, sir!"

And he went.

The lieutenant buttoned his coat again carefully, put on his
sword-belt, and placed a revolver in his pocket. Then he lit a
cigar, but found it impossible to smoke for he had not enough air
in his lungs. He dusted his writing-table; he took his handkerchief
and wiped the large pair of scissors, the stick of sealing-wax, and
the match-box; he laid the ruler and the pen-holder parallel at an
exact right angle with the blotting-paper; then he began to put the
furniture straight. When that was finished, he took out his brush
and comb and did his hair before the looking-glass; he took down the
palette and examined the dabs of paint on it; he inspected all the red
caps and tried to make the easel stand on two legs. By the time that
the clanking of the weapons of his fatigue-party was audible in the
courtyard, there was not a single object in the room which he had not
handled.

Then he went out, gave the command "Left wheel! March!" and quitted the
village.

He felt as though he were running away from a foe of superior power,
and the soldiers found it difficult to follow him. When they came to
a field he made them go in single file so as not to trample down the
grass. He did not turn round, but the soldier next behind him could see
how the cloth of the back of his coat twitched from time to time, as
when one shudders, or expects a blow from behind.

At the edge of the wood he ordered a halt; he told the men to keep
quiet and to rest while he went into the wood. When he found himself
alone and was quite sure that no one could see him, he took a deep
breath and turned towards the dark thickets through which narrow
foot-paths lead to the Gorge-aux-loups. The under-wood and bushes
lay in shadow, but above the sun still shone brightly on the tops of
the oaks and beeches. He felt as though he lay on the dark bottom of
the sea, and through the green water saw above him the light of day
which he never more would reach. The great, wonderfully beautiful wood
which formerly had soothed his troubled spirit seemed this evening so
disharmonious, so repellent, so cold. Life appeared so heartless, so
contradictory, and Nature herself seemed unhappy in her unconscious
sleep. Here also the terrible struggle for existence was being carried
on, bloodlessly it is true, but just as cruelly as by conscious
creatures. He saw how the baby oaks spread themselves out to bushes
in order to kill the tender beech-seedlings which would never be more
than seedlings; of a thousand beeches only one could get to the light
and thereby become a giant, which should in its turn rob the rest of
life. And the ruthless oak, which stretched out its gnarled, rough arms
as though it wished to keep the whole sun for itself, had discovered
how to wage an underground strife. It sent out its long roots in all
directions, undermining the ground; it ate away from the others the
smallest particles of nourishment; and when it could not overshadow a
rival till it was dead, it starved it out. The oak had already murdered
the pine-wood, but the beech came as an avenger slow but sure, for its
acrid juices kill everything where it predominates. It had discovered
the method of poisoning which was irresistible, for not a single plant
could grow in-its shadow; the earth around it was dark as a grave, and
therefore the future belonged to it.

The lieutenant wandered on and on. He struck about with his sword
without thinking how many hopeful young oaklings he destroyed, how
many headless cripples he produced. In fact he hardly thought any more,
for all the activities of his soul seemed crushed in a mortar to pulp.
His thoughts tried to crystallise themselves but dissolved and floated
away; memories, hopes, wrath, gentler feelings, and one great hatred of
all the perversity which by the operation of an inexplicable natural
force had come to rule the world, melted together in his brain, as
though an inner fire had suddenly raised the temperature and obliged
all its solid constituents to assume a fluid form.

Suddenly he started and stood still as if arrested, for from Marlotte
came a sound rolling over the fields and redoubling its echoes in the
hollow passage of the "Wolves' gorge." It was the drum! First a long
roll--trrrrrrrrrrrrrom!--and then blow on blow, one and two, dull and
muffled, as when one nails up a coffin and fears to disturb the house
of mourning--trrrom!--trrrom!--trom!--trom!

He took out his watch; it was a quarter to seven. In a quarter of an
hour it would happen! He wished to return and see it. No, he had just
run away to avoid it; he would not see it for anything. Then he climbed
up a tree.

Now he saw the village, which looked so bright and homelike with its
little gardens and church-tower rising above the house roofs. He saw
no more, but held his watch in his hand and followed the second hand.
Tick, tick, tick, tick--it ran round the little dial-plate so swiftly;
but when the second hand had made one round, the long one made a jerk
and the steady hour hand stood still, as it seemed to him, though it
was moving also.

Now the watch showed five minutes to seven. He gripped the smooth black
beech stem he was standing by very tightly. The watch trembled in his
hand, there was a humming in his ears, and he felt a burning sensation
at the roots of his hair. Crash! There was a sound just as when a plank
breaks, and above a dark slate roof and a white apple tree rose a blue
cloud of smoke over the village, bluish white like a spring cloud; but
above the cloud one, two, and several smoke-rings shot up in the air,
as though they had been shooting at pigeons and not towards a wall.

"They were not all so bad as I thought," he said to himself as he got
down from the tree, feeling quieter now that it was over. And now the
little village church bell began to ring, speaking of peace and quiet
for the dead who had done their duty, but not for all the living who
had done theirs.

The sun had gone down, and the moon, whose pale yellow disk had hung
in the sky all the afternoon, began to redden and gather light as the
lieutenant with his men marched by Montcourt, still followed by the
ringing of the little bell. They came out on the great high-road to
Nemours, which, with its two rows of poplars, seemed peculiarly suited
for marching on. So they went on till it was quite night and the moon
shone clearly. In the last row the men had already begun to whisper
and consult secretly whether they should not ask the corporal to give
the lieutenant some sort of hint that the district was unsafe and that
they should return to their quarters in order to be able to march at
daybreak, when Von Bleichroden quite unexpectedly commanded "Halt!"
They stood on a rising ground from which Marlotte could be seen.

The lieutenant stood quite still, like a pointer who startles a
covey of partridges. Now the drum was beating again. Then the clock
in Montcourt struck nine, followed by those in Grez, in Bourron, in
Nemours; and then all the little church bells began to ring for
vespers, vying with each other in shrillness, and through them all
pierced the tones of the bell in Marlotte, which called "Help! help!"
and Von Bleichroden could not help. Now came a booming along the
ground, as though from the depths of the earth; it was the firing of
the evening gun at the headquarters in Chalons. The moon shone through
the light evening mists which were lying like great flocks of wool
above the little River Loin, and lit it up so that it resembled a lava
stream running in the distance from the dark wood of Fontainebleau
which rose like a volcano. The evening was oppressively warm, but the
men had all white faces, so that the bats which swarmed around them
flew close by their ears, as they do when they see anything white. All
knew what the lieutenant was thinking about, but they had never seen
him behave so strangely and feared that it was not all right with this
aimless reconnaissance on the high-road. At last the corporal summoned
up boldness to approach him, and under the form of making a report drew
his attention to the fact that the tattoo had sounded.

Von Bleichroden received the information with a humble air, as when one
receives a command, and gave the order to return home.

When, one hour later, they entered the first street of Marlotte the
corporal noticed that the lieutenant's right leg was contracted as
though by a spavin, and that he moved in a diagonal course like a
horse-fly. In the market-place the troops were dismissed without
evening prayers, and the lieutenant disappeared.

He did not wish to return to his rooms at once. Something was drawing
him he knew not whither. He ran about with widely opened eyes and
inflated nostrils, like a hound on the scent. He examined the walls and
sniffed for a familiar smell. He saw nothing and met no one. He wished
to see where "it" had happened, but he also feared to see it. At last
he became tired and went home. In the courtyard he stopped and then
went round the cook-house. Suddenly he came upon the sergeant and was
so startled that he had to support himself by holding on to the wall.
The sergeant was also startled, but recovered himself and began, "I was
looking for you, sir, in order to make my report."

"Very good! Very good indeed! Go home and lie down," answered Von
Bleichroden, as though he feared to hear details.

"Yes, sir, but it was----"

"Very good! Go! Go!"

He spoke so quickly and uninterruptedly that it was impossible for
the sergeant to put in a word. Every time he opened his mouth he was
overwhelmed with a torrent of words, so that at last he became tired of
it and went away. Then the lieutenant breathed again and felt like a
boy who has escaped a thrashing.

He was now in the garden. The moon shone brightly on the yellow wall
of the cook-house, and the vine stretched its skeleton arms as though
in a very long yawn. But what was that? Two or three hours before it
had been dead and leafless, simply a grey skeleton which writhed, and
now were there not hanging on it the finest red clusters, and had not
the stem grown green? He went nearer in order to see whether it was the
same vine.

As he came close to the wall he stepped in something slippery and was
aware of the same nauseous smell which one perceives in butchers'
shops. And now he saw that it was the same vine, certainly the same,
but the plaster of the wall was broken by bullets and sprinkled with
blood.

He went away quickly. When he came into the front hall he stumbled over
something which lay under his feet. He drew off his boots in the hall
and threw them out in the garden. Then he went into his room, where his
tea was laid. He felt terribly hungry but could not eat. He remained
standing and staring at the covered table which was so neatly spread:
the white pat of butter with a little radish laid on the top of it;
the tablecloth was white and he saw that it was embroidered with his
or his wife's initials, which had not been there at first; the little
goat's milk cheese lay so neatly on its vine leaf, as though something
more than the fear of a forced contribution had operated here; the
beautiful little white loaf so unlike the brown rye-bread to which he
was accustomed; the red wine in the polished decanter; the thin reddish
slices of mutton--all seemed to have been arranged by friendly hands.
But he felt afraid to touch the food, and suddenly rang the bell.
Immediately the landlady stood in the doorway without saying a word.
She looked down at his feet and waited for an order. The lieutenant did
not know what he wanted, nor did he remember for what he had rung, but
he had to say something.

"Are you angry with me?" he stammered.

"No, sir," answered the woman mildly. "Does the gentleman want
anything?" And she looked down again at his feet.

He also looked down to see what had attracted her attention, and
discovered that he was standing in his stockings, and that the floor
was covered with red footprints--red footprints with the mark of the
toes where his stockings had been torn, for he had walked far that day.

"Give me your hand, my good woman," he said, stretching out his own.

"No," answered the woman, and looked straight into his eyes. Then she
left the room.

Herr von Bleichroden tried to pluck up courage after this snub, and
took a chair and sat down to his meal. He lifted the plate of meat
in order to help himself, but the smell of the meat made him feel
ill. He stood up, opened the window, and threw the whole plate with
its contents into the garden. His whole body trembled and he felt
sick; his eyes were so sensitive that the light tried them, and all
bright colours irritated them. He threw out the red bottle of wine, he
took away the red radish from the butter, the red painters' caps and
palettes--everything that was red had to go. Then he lay down on the
bed. His eyes were tired, but he could not close them, so he lay for an
hour, till he heard voices in the tap-room. He did not wish to listen,
but he could not shut his ears, and recognised that they were two
corporals who were drinking beer and talking.

"Those were two sturdy fellows--the two short ones, but the long one
was weak."

"Yes, he fell like a bundle of rags by the wall. He had asked that they
should fasten him to the espalier, for he wished to stand, he said."

"But the others--devil take me!--stood with their arms folded over
their breasts, as though they were going to be photographed."

"Yes, but when the priest came into the billiard-room and told them
there was no chance, all three fell crash on the ground, so at least
the sergeant said, but there was no scream nor prayer for mercy."

"Yes, they were deuced plucky chaps. Your health!"

Herr von Bleichroden pressed his head into his pillow and stopped his
ears with the sheets. But presently he got up. It was as if something
drew him forcibly to the door behind which they were talking, he wanted
to hear more; but the corporals now conversed in low tones. Accordingly
he stole forward, leant his back against a corner, laid his ear to the
keyhole and listened.

"But did you see our people? Their faces were as grey as pipe ashes,
and many of them shot in the air. Don't let us talk more about it! But
they got what they deserved, and they weighed much more when they went
than when they came. It was like shooting little birds with grapeshot."

"Did you see the priest's boys in red cassocks who stood and sang with
the coffee-roasters? It was like snuffing out a light when the rifles
cracked. They rolled in the bean-beds like sparrows, fluttering their
wings and turning their eyes. And how the old women came and picked up
the pieces! Oh! oh! but so it goes in war. Your health!"

Herr von Bleichroden had heard enough; the blood had so gone to his
brain that he could not sleep. He went into the tap-room and told the
corporals-to go home. Then he undressed himself, dipped his head in the
hand-basin, took up Schopenhauer and began to read with pulses beating
violently:


"Birth and death both belong to life; they constitute two opposites
which condition each other; they are the two extreme poles in
each manifestation of life. This is just what the deepest of all
mythologies, the Hindu, has expressed by investing Siva the goddess
of destruction with a necklace of skulls and the Lingam, the organ of
reproduction. Death is the painful dissolution of a knot which was tied
in pleasure, it is the forcible doing away with the fundamental mistake
of our existence, it is deliverance from a delusion."

He let the book drop, for he heard someone crying and tossing about in
his bed. Who was in the bed? He saw a body, the under part of which was
painfully contorted by cramp, while the muscles of the chest stood out
strained like the staves of a cask, and he heard a low, hollow sound
like a shriek smothered under the bed-clothes. It was his own body! Had
he then been divided into two, that he heard and saw himself as though
he were another person? The screaming continued. The door opened and
the mild-mannered landlady came in, probably alter knocking.

"What does the gentleman want?" she asked with shining eyes and a
peculiar smile upon her lips.

"I!" answered the sick man. "Nothing! But I am very ill and would like
to see a doctor."

"There is no doctor here, but the priest is accustomed to help us,"
answered the woman, smiling no longer.

"Send for the priest then," said the lieutenant, "though I don't
generally like them."

"But when one is ill, one likes them," said the woman, and disappeared.

When the priest entered he went to the bed and took the sick man's
wrist.

"What do you think it is?" asked the latter. "What do you think it is?"

"A bad conscience," was the priest's brief reply.

Herr von Bleichroden answered excitedly, "A bad conscience after doing
one's duty!"

"Yes," answered the priest, tying a wet handkerchief round the sick
man's head. "Listen to me while you still can. It is now _you_ who are
condemned--to a worse lot than the --three! Listen to me carefully.
I know the symptoms. You are on the edge of madness. You must try to
think the matter out. Think hard, and you will find your brain get
right again. Look at me, and follow my words if you can. You have
become two persons. You regard one part of yourself as though it were
a second or a third person. How did that happen? It is the social
falsehood, which makes us all double. When you wrote to your wife
to-day you were a man--a true, simple, good man; but when you spoke
with me you were another character altogether. Just as an actor loses
his personality and becomes a mere conglomeration of the parts he
performs, so an official becomes two persons at least. Now when there
comes a spiritual shock, upheaval or earthquake, the soul splits, as it
were, in two, and the two natures lie side by side, and contemplate
each other.

"I see a book lying on the ground which I also know. The author was a
deep thinker, perhaps the deepest of all. He saw through the misery and
nothingness of earthly life as though he had learnt from our Lord and
Saviour, but for all that he could not help being a double character,
for life, birth, habit and human weakness compelled him to relapses.
You see, sir, that I have read other books beside the breviary. And I
talk as a doctor, not as a priest, for we both--follow me carefully--we
both understand one another. Do you think I do not know the curse of
the double life which I lead? Not that I feel any doubt of the holy
things, which have passed into my blood and bones, so to speak, but I
know, sir, that I do not speak in God's name when I speak. Falsehood
passes into us from our mother's womb and breast, and he who would tell
the whole truth out under present circumstances--yes, yes! Can you
follow me?"

The sick man listened eagerly, and his eyelids had not dropped once all
the time the priest was speaking.

"Now there is a little traitor," continued the priest, "with a torch in
his hand, an angel who goes about with a basket of roses with which
he bestrews the refuse-heaps of life. He is an angel of deceit, and
he is called 'The Beautiful.' The heathen worshipped him in Greece;
princes have done him homage, for he has bewitched the eyes of people
so that they could not see things as they are. He goes through the
whole of life, falsifying and falsifying. Why do you warriors dress in
splendid clothes with gold and brilliant colours? Why do you always
work with music and flying flags? Is it not to conceal what is really
at the bottom of your profession? If you loved the truth, you ought
to go about in white smocks, like butchers, so that the bloodstains
might show distinctly, with knives and marrow-borers as they do in
slaughter-houses, with axes dripping blood and greasy with tallow.
Instead of a band of music, you ought to drive before you a herd of
howling maniacs whom the sights of the battlefield have driven crazy;
instead of flags, you should carry shrouds and draw coffins on your
wagon-trains." The sick man, who now writhed in convulsions, clasped
his hands in prayer and bit his finger-nails. The priest's face had
assumed a terrible expression--hard, implacable, hostile. He continued:

"You are naturally a good man, you, and I will not punish that side
of you, but I punish you as a representative, as you called yourself,
and your punishment will be a warning to others. Will you see the three
corpses? Will you see them?"

"No! For Jesus' sake!" shrieked the sick man, whose nightshirt was wet
with sweat and clung to his shoulder-blades.

"Your cowardice shows that you are a man, and, as such, cowardly."

As though struck by the blow of a whip, the sick man started up; his
face seemed composed, his chest was no more convulsed, and with a calm
voice, as though he were quite well, he said: "Go, devil of a priest,
or you will make me do something desperate."

"But I shall not come again if you call me," said the other. "Remember
that! Remember, that if you cannot sleep it is not my fault, but the
fault of those who lie in the billiard-room! In the billiard-room, you
know!" He flung open the door of the billiard-room, and a terrible
smell of carbolic acid streamed into the sick-chamber. "Do you smell
it? Do you smell it? That is not like smelling powder, nor is it an
exploit to telegraph home about. Great victory! Three dead and one
mad! God be praised! It is not an occasion for writing odes, strewing
flowers in the streets, and singing Te Deums in the churches? It is not
a victory! It is murder, murder, you murderer!"

Herr von Bleichroden had sprung out of bed and jumped out of the
window. In the courtyard he was seized by some of his men, whom he
tried to bite. Then he was bound and placed in a headquarter ambulance
in order to be taken to the asylum as a complete maniac.




CHAPTER II


It was a sunny morning at the end of February, 1871. Up the steep
Martheray Hill in Lausanne a young woman walked slowly, leaning on
the arm of a middle-aged man. She was far gone in pregnancy, and hung
heavily on her companion's arm. Her face was that of a girl, but it was
pale with care, and she was dressed in mourning. The man was not, from
which the passers-by concluded that he was not her husband. He seemed
in deep trouble, stooped down now and then to the little woman and
said a word or two to her, then seemed to be absorbed again in his own
thoughts. When they came to the old custom-house in front of the inn "A
l'Ours," they stood still.

"Is there another hill?" she asked.

"Yes, dear," he answered. "Let us sit down for a moment."

They sat down on a seat before the inn. Her heart beat slowly and her
breast heaved painfully, as though for want of air.

"I am sorry for you, poor brother," she said. "I see that you are
longing to be with your own family."

"Don't mention it, sister! Don't let us talk about it. Certainly my
heart is sometimes far away, and they need me at the sowing time, but
you are my sister, and one cannot disown one's flesh and blood."

"We shall see now," resumed Frau von Bleichroden, "whether this air and
this new treatment will help towards his cure. What do you think?"

"Certainly it will," her brother answered, but turned his head aside so
that she should not see the doubt in his face.

"What a winter I have passed through in Frankfort! To think that
Destiny can invent such tragedies! I think I could have borne his death
more easily than this living burial."

"But one must always hope," said her brother in a hopeless tone.
And his thoughts travelled far--to his children and his fields. But
immediately afterwards he felt ashamed of his selfishness, that he
could not sympathise fully with this grief, which was really not his
own but which he had to share, and he felt angry with himself.

Suddenly there sounded from the hill above a shrill, prolonged scream,
like the whistle of a locomotive, and then another.

"Does the train go so high up the mountain?" asked Frau von Bleichroden.

"Yes, it must be that," said her brother, and listened with wide-open
eyes.

The scream was repeated. But now it sounded as if someone were drowning.

"Let us go home again," said Herr Schantz, who had become quite pale;
"you cannot climb this hill to-day, and to-morrow we will be wiser and
take a carriage."

But his sister insisted on proceeding in spite of all. And so they
ascended the long hill to the hospital, though it was like a climb up
Calvary. Through the green hawthorn hedges on both sides of the way,
darted black thrushes with yellow beaks; grey lizards raced over the
ivy-grown walls and disappeared in the crevices. It was full spring,
for there had been no winter, and by the edges of the path bloomed
primroses and hellebores; but they did not arrest the attention of
the pilgrims. When they had got half-way up the hill, the mysterious
screaming was repeated. As though overcome by a sudden foreboding, Frau
von Bleichroden turned to her brother, looked in his eyes with her own,
which were clouding over, only to see her fears confirmed, then she
sank down on the path without being able to utter a cry, while a yellow
cloud of dust whirled over her. And there she remained lying.

Before her brother could collect himself a casual passer-by had run for
a carriage, and as the young woman was carried into it her work for the
coming generation had already begun, and now two cries were heard--the
cries of two human creatures from the depths of sorrow.

Her brother stood on the pathway looking up to the blue sky of spring,
and thought to himself, "If the cries could only be heard up there, but
it is certainly too high."

In the hospital which stood above them, Von Bleichroden had been lodged
in a room which had an open view towards the south. The walls were
padded and painted with flowing contours of landscapes in faint blue.
On the ceiling was painted an espalier with vine leaves. The floor was
carpeted, and under the carpet was a layer of straw. The furniture was
completely covered with horsehair and cushions, so that no corners or
edges of the wood were visible.

The situation of the door could not be discovered from within the room,
thereby diverting all the patient's thoughts of getting out and the
consciousness of being confined, the most dangerous of all to a mind
in a state of excitement. The windows, it is true, were grated, but the
gratings were elaborately wrought in the shape of lilies and leaves,
and so painted that their purpose was quite disguised.

Von Bleichroden's madness had taken the form of torments of conscience.
He imagined that he had murdered the keeper of a vineyard under
mysterious circumstances, which he could never bring himself to confess
for the simple reason that he could not remember them. Now he thought
himself condemned to death and sitting in prison awaiting the execution
of the sentence. But he had lucid intervals. Then he fastened large
sheets of paper on the walls of the room and wrote syllogisms on them
till they were covered. Then he remembered that he had caused some
franc-tireurs to be shot, but did not remember that he was married.
When his wife came to see him he received her visit like that of a
pupil to whom he was giving lessons in logic. He had written up as the
premise of his syllogisms, "All franc-tireurs are traitors and the
order is to shoot them." One day his wife, who was obliged to agree
with everything, had the rashness to shake his belief in the premise
that "all franc-tireurs are traitors," thereupon he tore down all the
syllogisms from the wall and said that he would spend twenty years in
proving the premise, for premises must first be proved.

Besides this, he cherished great projects for the good of mankind. What
is the object of all our striving here upon earth? he asked. Why does
the king reign, the priest preach, the poet write, the artist paint?
In order to procure nitrogen for the body. Nitrogen is the dearest
of all kinds of food, and that is why meat is so expensive. Nitrogen
is intelligence, for the rich who eat meat are more intelligent than
the others who only eat vegetable hydrates. Now (so ran his argument)
nitrogen was beginning to be scarce on the earth and this was why
there came wars, workmen's strikes, newspapers, pietists and _coups
d'état_. Therefore it was necessary to discover a new nitrogen mine.
Von Bleichroden had done so, and now all men would be equal; liberty,
equality and fraternity would arrive and be realised on earth. This
inexhaustible mine was--the air. It contained seventy-nine per cent
of nitrogen, and a means must be devised of inhaling it directly and
of using it for the nourishment of the body without the necessity of
it being first condensed into grass, corn and vegetables, and then
converted by an animal into flesh. That was the problem of the future
with which Von Bleichroden was busying himself; its solution would
render agriculture and cattle-breeding superfluous, and the golden age
would return on earth. But at intervals he again sank into dreams about
the murder he supposed himself to have committed, and was profoundly
miserable.

The same February morning on which his wife had been on her way to the
asylum and had been obliged to return, Von Bleichroden sat in his new
room and looked out of the window. At first he had contemplated the
vine painted on the ceiling and the landscape on the walls; then he
set himself in a comfortable chair opposite the window so that he had
a clear view in front of him. He felt quiet to-day, for he had taken a
cold bath the evening before and had slept well. He knew that the month
was February, but he did not know where he was. The first thing that
struck him was the absence of snow out of doors, and that surprised him
for he had never been in southern lands. Outside in front of the window
stood green bushes--the "laurier teint" quite covered with flowers,
the "laurier cerise" with its shining bright green leaves, green
through the whole winter. There was also a box tree and an elm quite
overgrown with ivy which concealed all the branches and gave the tree
the appearance of being in full leaf. Over the lawn, which was starred
with primroses, as though a shower of sulphur had fallen on it, a man
passed mowing the grass with a scythe, while a little girl was raking
the beds.

Von Bleichroden took an almanac and read "February." "Raking in
February! Where am I?" he asked himself. Then his eyes travelled beyond
the garden and he saw a deep valley which sank gradually but was as
green as a summer meadow. Little villages and churches stood here and
there, and he could see bright green weeping-willows. "In February!" he
said to himself again. And where the meadows ceased there lay a lake,
quite calm and clear blue as air. On the other side of the lake was a
landscape fading in azure tints, topped by a chain of hills. But above
the chain of hills were some other objects which resembled clouds. They
were of as delicate a white as fresh-washed wool, but they were pointed
and over them lay small thin clouds. He did not know where he was, but
it was so beautiful that it could not be on the earth. Was he dead, and
had he entered another world? He was certainly not in Europe. Perhaps
he was dead! He sank into quiet musing and sought to realise his new
situation.

But when he looked up again he saw that the whole sunny picture was
framed and crossed by the window-grating; the hammered iron lilies and
the leaf-work stood out in sharp relief as though they were floating
in the air. He was at first startled, but then he composed himself; he
contemplated the picture once more, especially the pointed rosy clouds
(as he thought them). Then he felt a wonderful joy and sensation of
relief in his head: it was as though the convolutions of his brain,
after having been hopelessly entangled, began to arrange and order
themselves. He was so glad that he began to sing, as he thought, but he
had never sung in his life and therefore he only uttered cries of joy.
It was these which had issued from the window and filled his wife with
grief and despair. After sitting thus for an hour, he had remembered an
old painting in a bowling alley near Berlin which represented a Swiss
landscape, and now he knew that he was in Switzerland and that the
pointed clouds were Alps.

When the doctor made his second round he found Von Bleichroden sitting
quietly in a chair before the window and humming to himself, and it was
not possible to divert his gaze from the beautiful scene. But he was
quite clear in his mind and fully realised his situation.

"Doctor," he said, pointing to the grated window, "why do you want to
spoil and fleur-de-lisify such a beautiful picture? Won't you let me
go into the open air? I think it would do me good, and I promise not to
run away."

The doctor took his hand in order to feel his pulse secretly with his
forefinger.

"My pulse is only seventy, doctor," said the patient, smiling, "and I
slept well last night. You have nothing to fear."

"I am glad," said the doctor, "that the treatment has really had some
effect on you. You can go out."

"Do you know, doctor," said the patient with an energetic gesture, "do
you know that I feel as though I had been dead and come to life in
another planet--so beautiful does it all seem. Never did I dream that
the earth could be so wonderful."

"Yes, sir, the earth is still beautiful where civilisation has not
spoilt it, and here nature is so strong that it resists the efforts of
men. Do you think that your own country was always so ugly as it now
is? No; where now there are waste sandy plains, which could not nourish
a goat, there formerly rustled noble woods of oak, beech and fir,
under whose shadow beasts of the chase fed, and where fat herds of the
Norse-men's best kine fattened themselves on acorns."

"You are a disciple of Rousseau, doctor," broke in the patient.

"Rousseau was a Genevese, sir. There on the margin of the lake, deep
in the bay which you see above the top of the elms, he was born and
suffered, and there his 'Emile' and 'Contrat Sociale,' the gospels of
nature, were burnt. There on the left, at the foot of the Valais Alps,
in little Clarens, he wrote the book of love, 'La Nouvelle Heloise,'
for it is the Lake of Geneva which you see."

"The Lake of Geneva!" repeated Von Bleichroden.

"In this quiet valley," continued the doctor, "where peaceful men
live, many wounded spirits have sought healing. See there to the
right, immediately above the little promontory with the tower and the
poplars, lies Ferney. Thither fled Voltaire when he had finished his
rôle of 'persifleur' in Paris, and there he cultivated the ground and
erected a temple to the Supreme Being. Farther on lies Coppet, where
lived Madame de Staël, the worst enemy of Napoleon, the betrayer of
the people, who dared to teach the French, her countrymen, that the
German nation was not France's barbarian enemy, for nations do not hate
each other. Look now to the left; hither to this quiet lake fled the
shattered Byron who, like a bound Titan, had torn himself loose from
the trammels by which a period of reaction had endeavoured to imprison
his strong soul, and here below he wrote the 'Prisoner of Chillon,'
to express his intense hatred of tyrants. There under the lofty Mount
Grammont he was nearly drowned one day before the little fishing
village St Gingolphe, but his life was not yet finished. Hither fled
all who could not tolerate the infected air which spread like a cholera
over Europe after the conspiracy of the Holy Alliance against the newly
won rights of the Revolution, that is, of mankind. Here, a thousand
feet below you, Mendelssohn composed his melancholy songs, and Gounod
wrote his 'Faust.' Can you not see whence he derived his inspiration
for the 'Witches' Night,'--there, in the precipices of the Savoy Alps?
Here Victor Hugo composed his fierce satires against the treachery of
Napoleon III.; and here (strange irony of fate!) below in little quiet
retired Vevey, where the north wind can never come, your own Kaiser
sought to forget the terrible scenes of Sadowa and Königgratz. There
the Russian Gortschakoff hid himself when he felt the ground shaking
beneath his feet; here Lord Russell washed off the dust of politics and
breathed pure unpolluted air; here Thiers sought to reduce to order
his inconsistent, but, as I believe, honest schemes, often confused by
political storms, and may he now, when he is to support the destinies
of his people, remember the innocent hours in which his spirit communed
with itself before the mild but solemn majesty of nature! And look over
to Geneva, sir! There dwells no king with his court, but there was born
a thought which is as great as Christianity, and whose apostles also
carry a cross, a red cross on their white flags. When the Mauser rifles
shot at the French eagle and the Chassepot at the German eagle, the red
cross was held sacred by those who did not bow before the black cross,
and in this sign, I believe, the future will conquer."

The patient, who had listened quietly to this strange speech which was
as emotional, not to say sentimental, as if it had come from a preacher
instead of a doctor, felt bored. "You are an enthusiast, doctor," he
said.

"So will you be when you have lived here three months," answered the
physician.

"You believe then in the treatment?" asked the patient somewhat less
sceptically than before.

"I believe in the inexhaustible power of nature to heal the sickness of
civilisation," he answered. "Do you feel strong enough to hear a good
piece of news?" he continued, watching his patient closely.

"Quite, doctor!"

"Well then, peace has been made!"

"God! What a happiness!" the patient burst out.

"Yes certainly," said the doctor; "but don't ask more, for you cannot
hear more to-day. Come out now, but be prepared for one thing. Your
recovery will not be so rapid as you think. You may have relapses.
Memory, you see, is our worst enemy,--but come with me now."

The doctor took his patient's arm and led him into the garden. There
were no railings and no walls to bar one's passage, but only green
hedges, which conducted the wanderer back by labyrinthine paths to his
starting-point; but behind the hedges were deep trenches which were
impossible to cross.

The lieutenant sought for familiar phrases with which to express his
delight, but he felt that they were so inadequate that he resolved to
be silent, listening to a wonderful soundless nerve music. He felt
as though all the strings of his soul were being tuned again, and he
experienced a calm such as he had not felt for a very long time.

"Do you doubt whether I am recovered?" he asked the doctor with a
melancholy smile.

"You are on the way to recovery, as I told you before, but you are not
quite well."

They found themselves now before a little arched stone door through
which patients, accompanied by keepers, were passing.

"Where are all these men going?" asked the lieutenant.

"Follow them and you will see," said the doctor. "You have my
permission."

Von Bleichroden entered, but the doctor beckoned to a keeper. "Go down
to the Hôtel Faucon to Frau von Bleichroden," he said. "Give her my
respects, and say that her husband is on the way to recovery but has
not yet asked after his wife. When he does that he is saved."

The keeper went, and the doctor followed his patient through the little
stone gate.

Von Bleichroden had entered a large hall which resembled no room that
he had even seen before. It was neither a church, nor a theatre, nor a
school, nor a town hall, but a little of all together. At the end of it
was an apse which opened in three windows filled with painted glass.
The colours harmonised with each other as though composed by a great
artist's hand, and the light which entered was resolved, as it were,
into one great harmonic major chord. It made the same impression on the
patient as the C Major chord with which Haydn disperses the darkness of
chaos, when at the creation the Lord, after the choir have been long
painfully toiling at disentangling the disordered forces of nature,
suddenly calls out "Let there be light!" and cherubim and seraphim join
in.

Under the window was a rock of stalactite formation, shaped like
an arch, from which trickled a little stream falling into a basin
overhung by two arum lilies whose cups were as white as angels' wings.
The pillars which enclosed the apse were constructed in no familiar
architectural style, and their shafts were covered up to the roof with
soft brown liver-wort. The lower panelling of the wall was covered
with fir twigs, and the walls themselves were decorated by leaves of
ever-green plants--laurel, holm-oak and mistletoe--arranged in designs
of no particular style. Sometimes they seemed about to form letters,
but lost themselves in faint fantastic flourishes, like Raphael's
arabesques. Under the window apertures hung large wreaths as if for a
May festival, and along the frieze of the ceiling there ran a design
which had nothing in common with the lotus borders of Egypt, the
meandering curves of Greece, the Acanthus decorations of Rome, or the
trefoil and crucifers of the Gothic style.

Von Bleichroden looked about him and found the place provided with
benches where the patients of the institute sat absorbed in silent
wonder. He took a seat on one of them and heard someone sighing near
him. Then he perceived a man about forty years old who had covered his
face with his hands and wept. He had an aquiline nose, moustache and
pointed beard, and his profile resembled those which Von Bleichroden
had seen on French coins. He was certainly a Frenchman. Here then they
were to meet, enemy with enemy, both somewhat tearful! Why? Because
they had fulfilled their duties towards their respective fatherlands!
Herr von Bleichroden felt excited and uneasy when he suddenly heard a
strain of faint music. The organ was playing a chorale, but a chorale
in the major key; it was neither Lutheran, nor Catholic, nor Calvinist,
nor Greek, yet it spoke a language, and the patient thought he heard
hopeful and comforting words. Then a man got up by the apsis and stood
there half hidden by the stalactite rock. Was he a priest? No, he was
dressed in a light grey coat, wore a bright blue cravat, and displayed
an open shirt-front. He had no book with him, but spoke gently and
simply as one speaks among friends. He spoke of the simple teaching
of Christianity--to love one's neighbour as oneself; to be patient,
tolerant, and forgiving towards enemies. He recalled how Christ had
conceived of humanity as one, but how the evil nature of man had
counteracted this great idea--how men had grouped themselves into
nations, sects and schools; but he also expressed his firm hope that
the principles of Christianity would soon be realised. He came down
after speaking for a quarter of an hour, and offering a short prayer to
God the Omnipotent without introducing any names which might remind his
hearers of a formal creed or rouse their passions.

Herr von Bleichroden awoke as though from a dream. He had, then, been
in church--he who, weary of all petty religious strifes, had not
been to a service for fifteen years! And here, in a lunatic asylum,
it was his fortune to find a Free Church fully realised. Here sat
Roman Catholics, Greek Catholics, Lutherans, Calvinists, Zwinglians,
Anglicans side by side and worshipped the same God in common. What a
crushing criticism this church hall suggested for all those sects, born
of the selfishness of men, which massacred, burnt and despised each
other! What a handle did it supply for the attack of the "heretical"
church on this political and dynastic Christianity!

Herr von Bleichroden let his gaze wander over the beautiful hall in
order to drive away the terrible pictures which his imagination had
conjured up. His eye roamed about till it fastened on the wall opposite
the apse. There hung a colossal wreath, in the centre of which stood
a word whose letters were formed of fir twigs. It was the French word
"Noel," followed by the German "Weihnacht." What poet had arranged
this hall? What knower of men, what deep mind had so understood how
to awaken the most beautiful and purest of all recollections? Would
not an overclouded mind feel an eager longing for light and clearness
when it recollected the festival of light commemorating the end or,
at any rate, the beginning of the end of the dark days at the turn of
the year? Would not the recollection of childhood, when no religious
strifes, no political hatred, no ambitious empty dreams had obscured
the sense of right in a pure conscience--would it not stir a music in
the soul louder than all those wild-beast bowlings which one had heard
in life in the struggle for bread, or more often for honour?

He continued to meditate, and asked himself, how is it that man, so
innocent as a child, afterwards becomes so evil as he grows older? Is
it education and school, these lauded products of civilisation, which
teach us to be bad? What do our first school-books teach us? They teach
us that God is an Avenger Who punishes the sins of the fathers in the
children unto the third and fourth generation; they teach us that those
men are heroes who have roused nation against nation, and pillaged
lands and kingdoms; that those are great men who have succeeded in
obtaining honour the emptiness of which all see, but after which all
strive; and that true statesmen are those who accomplish great and not
high aims in a crafty manner, whose whole merit consists in want of
conscience, and who will always conquer in the struggle against those
who possess one. And in order that our children may learn all this,
parents make sacrifices and renunciation and suffer the great pain
of separation from their offspring. Surely the whole world must be a
lunatic asylum, if this place was the most reasonable one he had ever
been in!

Now he looked again at the only written word in the whole church, and
spelt it over again; then there began to rise in the secret recesses
of his memory a picture, as when a photographer washes a grey negative
plate with ferrous sulphate as soon as he has taken it out of the
camera. He thought he saw his last Christmas Eve represented before
him. The last? No! Then he was in Frankfort. Then it was the last but
one. It was the first evening he had spent in his fiancée's house,
for they had been betrothed the day before. Now he saw the home of
the old pastor, his father-in-law; he saw the low room with the white
sideboard, the piano, the chaffinch in the cage, the balsam plants
in the window, the cupboard with the silver jug on it, the tobacco
pipes--some of meerschaum, some of red clay--and the daughter of the
house going about hanging nuts and apples on the Christmas tree.
The daughter of the house! It was like a flash of lightning in the
darkness, but of beautiful, harmless summer lightning which one watches
from a veranda without any fear of being struck. He was betrothed, he
was married, he had a wife--his own wife who reunited him to life which
he had previously despised and hated. But where was she? He must see
and meet her now, at once! He must fly to her, otherwise he would die
of impatience.

He hastened out of the church, and immediately met the doctor who had
been waiting for him to see the effect of his visit to it. Herr von
Bleichroden seized him by the shoulders, looked him straight in the
eyes, and said with a kind of gasp, "Where is my wife? Take me to her
at once. At once! Where is she?"

"She and your daughter," said the doctor quietly, "are waiting for you
below in the Rue de Bourg."

"My daughter! I have a daughter!" interrupted the patient, and began
weeping.

"You are very emotional, Herr von Bleichroden," said the doctor,
smiling.

"Yes, doctor, one must be so here."

"Well, come and dress for going out," answered the doctor, and took his
arm. "In half an hour you will be with your family and then you will be
with yourself again." And they disappeared into the front hall of the
institute.

       *       *       *       *       *

Herr von Bleichroden was a completely modern type. Great grandson
of the French Revolution, grandson of the Holy Alliance, son of the
year 1830, like an ill-starred sailor he had made shipwreck between
the cliffs of revolution and reaction. When between twenty and thirty
years of age his intellect awoke and he realised in what a tissue of
lies, both religious and political, he was involved, he felt as though
he were really awake for the first time, or as though he were the
only sane man shut up in a mad-house. And when he could not discover
a single aperture in the enclosing wall by which he might escape
without being confronted by a bayonet or the muzzle of a gun, he fell
into a state of despair. He ceased to believe in anything, even in the
possibility of deliverance, and betook himself to the opium dens of
pessimism, in order at any rate to benumb his pain since there was no
cure. Schopenhauer became his friend and later on he found in Hartmann
the most brutal teller of truth which the world has seen.

But society summoned him and demanded that he should enrol himself
somewhere in its ranks. Von Bleichroden plunged into scientific study
and chose one of the sciences which has the least to do with the
present--geology, or rather that branch of it, palaeontology, which had
to do with the animal and plant life of a past world. When he asked
himself, "Is this of any use to mankind?" he could only answer, "It
is useful solely to myself, as a kind of opiate." He could never read
a newspaper without feeling fanaticism rising up in him like incipient
madness, and therefore he held everything which could remind him of his
contemporaries and the present at arm's length. He began to hope that
he would be able to spend his days in a dearly earned state of mental
torpor, quietly and with his sanity preserved.

Then he married. He could not escape nature's inexorable law regarding
the preservation of the species. In his wife he had sought to regain
all those inner elements which he had succeeded in eliminating from
himself, and she became his old emotional "ego," over which he rejoiced
quietly without quitting his entrenchments. In her he found his
complement, and he began to collect himself; but he felt also that his
whole future life was based upon two corner-stones. One was his wife;
if she gave way, he and his whole edifice would collapse. When only two
months after their marriage he was torn from her side, he was no longer
himself. He felt as though he had lost one eye, one lung and one arm,
and therefore also he fell so quickly asunder when the blow struck him.

At the sight of his daughter, a new element seemed to be introduced
into what Von Bleichroden called his "natural soul" as distinguished
from his "society soul," which was the product of education. He felt
now that he was incorporated in the family, and that when he died he
would not really die, but that his soul would continue to live in his
child; he realised, in a word, that his soul was really immortal, even
though his body perished in the strife between chemical elements. He
felt himself all at once bound to live and to hope, though sometimes
he was seized with despair when he heard his fellow-countrymen, in
the natural intoxication of victory, ascribe the successful issue
of the war to certain individuals, who, seated in their carriages,
had contemplated the battle-field through their field-glasses. But
then his pessimism seemed to him culpable, because he was hindering
the development of the new epoch by a bad example, and he became
an optimist from a sense of duty. He did not, however, venture to
return home from fear of falling into despondency, but asked for his
discharge, realised his small property, and settled down in Switzerland.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a fine warm autumn evening in Vevey in the year 1872. The clock
in the little pension Le Cedre had given the signal for dinner by
striking seven. Round the large dinner-table were assembled the inmates
of the pension, who were all mutually acquainted and lived on terms of
intimacy, as those do who meet in a neutral country.

Herr von Bleichroden and his wife had as their companions at the table
the melancholy Frenchman whom we have already seen in the hospital
church, an English, two Russians, a German and his wife, a Spanish
family, and two Tyrolese ladies.

Conversation proceeded as usual, quietly and peacefully--sometimes
falling into an almost emotional tone, at others touching on the most
burning questions of the day, without however kindling a conflagration.

"Never did I believe that the earth could be so supernaturally
beautiful as here," said Herr von Bleichroden, entranced with the view
through the open veranda doors.

"Nature is beautiful elsewhere also," said the German, "but I believe
our eyes were not healthy."

"That is true," answered the Englishman; "but it really is more
beautiful here than anywhere else. Have you never heard, gentlemen, how
the barbarians felt (they were Alemanni or Hungarians, I think) when
they emerged on the Dent Jaman and looked down on the Lake of Geneva?
They thought that the sky had fallen down on the earth, and were so
alarmed that they turned back again. The guide-book says so positively."

"I believe," said one of the Russians, "that it is the pure air,
free from falsehood, which one breathes here which causes us to find
everything so beautiful, although I will not deny that the beauties
of nature have a reflex action upon our minds and prevent them being
entangled in all our old prejudices. But only wait; when the heirs of
the Holy Alliance are dead, when the highest trees have been truncated,
our little plants also will flourish in clear sunshine."

"You are right," said Herr von Bleichroden; "but we shall not need to
truncate the trees. There are other, more humane ways of proceeding.
There was once an author who had written a mediocre play the success of
which depended on the way in which the principal female part was acted.
He went to a _prima donna_ and asked if she would undertake the rôle.
She gave an evasive reply. Then he forgot himself so far as to remind
her that, according to the rules of the theatre, she could be compelled
to play the part. 'That is true,' she answered, 'but I can make
difficulties.' We can also circumvent our chief opposing falsities. In
England it is simply an affair of the budget. Parliament cuts down the
grant to royal personages, and they go their way. That is the method of
legal reform. Is it not, Mr Englishman?"

"Certainly!" answered the Englishman. "Our Queen has the right to play
croquet and tennis, but she cannot meddle in politics."

"But the wars--the wars--will they never stop?" objected the Spaniard.

"When women get the vote, armies will be reduced," said Herr von
Bleichroden. "Isn't it so, wife?"

His wife nodded assentingly.

"For," continued he, "what mother will permit her son, what wife her
husband, what sister her brother to go into these battles? And when
there is no one to excite men against one another, then the so-called
race-hatred will disappear. 'Man is good but men are bad' said our
friend Jean Jacques, and he was right. Why are men more peaceful
here in this beautiful country? Why do they look more contented than
elsewhere? Because they have not daily and hourly these schoolmasters
over them; they know that they themselves have settled who is to rule
them; above all things they have so little to envy and so little
to annoy them. No royal retinues, no military parades, no pompous
spectacles which tempt a weak man to admire what is ostentatious but
false. Switzerland is the little miniature model after which the Europe
of the future will be built up."

"You are an optimist, sir," said the Spaniard.

"Yes," answered Von Bleichroden; "formerly a pessimist."

"You believe then," continued the Spaniard, "that what is possible in
a little country like Switzerland, with three million inhabitants and
only three languages, is possible also for the whole of Europe?"

Von Bleichroden seemed to hesitate, when one of the Tyrolese spoke.
"Pardon me," she said to the Spaniard, "you doubt whether this is
possible for Europe with its six or seven languages. It is too bold
an experiment, you think, to answer with so many nationalities. But
suppose I were to show you a land with twenty nationalities, Chinese,
Japanese, Negroes, and representatives of all the nations of Europe
mingled--that would be the international kingdom of the future. Well! I
have seen it for I have been in--America."

"Bravo!" said the Englishman. "Our Spanish friend is defeated."

"And you, sir," continued the Tyrolese, turning to the Frenchman, "you
mourn over Alsace-Lorraine, I see! You regard a war of _revanche_ as
unavoidable, for you do not believe that Alsace-Lorraine can continue
to remain German--you think the problem is insoluble."

The Frenchman sighed by way of assent.

"Well, when Europe is one confederation of states, as Herr von
Bleichroden calls Switzerland, then Alsace-Lorraine will be neither
French nor German but just simply Alsace-Lorraine. Is the problem
solved?"

The Frenchman lifted his glass politely and thanked her, bowing his
head with a melancholy smile.

"You smile," the courageous maiden resumed. "We have smiled all too
long, the smile of despair and scepticism; let us cease doing so! You
see most of the countries of Europe represented among us here. Among
ourselves, where no cynic hears us, we can utter the thoughts of our
hearts, but in parliament, in newspapers, and in books--there we are
cowardly, there we dare not expose ourselves to ridicule, and so we
swim with the stream. What, after all, is the use of being cynical?
Cynicism is the weapon of cowardice. One is anxious about one's heart.
Yes, it is disgusting to see one's entrails exposed at a shop door,
but to see those of others lying on the battle-field, while music and
a rain of flowers await the returning conquerors--that is splendid!
Voltaire was cynical, because he was still anxious about his heart,
while Rousseau vivisected himself, tore his heart out of his breast,
and held it against the sun, as the old Aztec priests did when they
sacrificed--yes, there was method in their madness. And who has changed
human kind--who told us that we were all wrong? Rousseau! Geneva yonder
burnt his books, but modern Geneva has raised a memorial to him. What
each of us here thinks privately, all think privately. Give us only
freedom to say it aloud!"

The Russians raised their black tea-glasses and vociferated words in
their language which only they understood. The Englishman filled his
glass and was about to propose a toast, when the servant-maid came in
and handed him a telegram. The conversation stopped for a moment; the
Englishman read the telegram with visible emotion, folded it up, placed
it in his pocket, and sank in thought. Herr von Bleichroden sat silent,
absorbed in contemplation of the beautiful landscape outside. The
Mont Grammont and the Dent d'Oche were lit up by the afterglow of the
descended sun, which also dyed red the vineyards and chestnut-groves
on the Savoy shore; the Alps glimmered in the damp evening air, and
seemed as unsubstantial as the lights and shades; they stood there like
disembodied powers of nature, dark and terrible on their reverse side,
threatening and gloomy in their hollows, but on their sun-fronting
sides, bright, smiling and joyful. Von Bleichroden thought of the
concluding words of the Tyrolese, and fancied he saw in Mont Grammont
a colossal heart with its apex looking towards the sky--the wounded,
scarred, bleeding heart of humanity which turned itself towards the
sun in a concentrated ardour of sacrifice, prepared to give all,
its best and its dearest, in order to receive all. Then the dark,
steel-blue evening sky was cut through by a streak of light, and above
the low-lying Savoy shore there rose a rocket of enormous size. It
rose high, apparently as high as the Dent d'Oche; it hung suspended as
though it were looking round on the beautiful earth outspread beneath
it before it burst. Thus it hesitated for a few seconds and then began
the descent; but it had not gone many yards before it exploded with a
report which took two minutes to reach Vevey. Then there spread out
something like a white cloud which assumed a four-cornered rectangular
shape, a flag of white fire; a moment after there was another report,
and on the white flag appeared a red cross.

All the party sprang up and hastened into the veranda.

"What does that mean?" exclaimed Herr von Bleichroden, startled.

No one could or would answer, for now there rose a whole volley of
rockets as if discharged from a crater over the peaks of the Voirons,
and scattered a shower of fire which was reflected in the gigantic
mirror of the lake.

"Ladies and gentlemen!" said the Englishman, raising his voice, while
a waiter placed a tray with filled champagne glasses on the table.
"Ladies and gentlemen!" he repeated, "this means, according to the
telegram which I have just received, that the first International
Tribunal at Geneva has finished its work; this means that a war between
two nations, or what would have been worse--a war against the future,
has been prevented; that a hundred thousand Americans and as many
Englishmen have to thank this day that they are alive. The Alabama
Question has been settled not to the advantage of America, but of
justice, not to the injury of England, but for the good of future
generations. Does our Spanish friend still believe that wars are
unavoidable? When our French friend smiles again, let him smile with
the heart and not with the lips only. And you, my German pessimist
friend, do you believe now that the franc-tireur question can be
settled without franc-tireurs and fusillades, but also only in this
way? And you, Russian gentlemen, whom I do not know personally, do
you think your modern method of forestry by truncating trees is the
only correct one? Do you not think it is better to go to the roots?
It is certainly a safer and quieter way. To-day, as an Englishman, I
ought to feel depressed, but I feel proud on account of my country, as
an Englishman always does, you know; but to-day I have a right to be
so, for England is the first European Power which has appealed to the
verdict of honourable men, instead of to blood and iron. And I wish you
all many such defeats as we have had to-day, for that will teach us to
be victorious. Raise your glasses, ladies and gentlemen, for the Red
Cross, for in this sign we will certainly conquer."

       *       *       *       *       *

Herr von Bleichroden remained in Switzerland. He could not tear himself
away from this wonderful scenery which had led him into another world
more beautiful than that which he had left behind.

Occasionally he had attacks of conscience, but this his doctor ascribed
to a nervousness which is only too common among cultivated people at
the present time. He resolved to elucidate the problem of conscience
in a little pamphlet which he proposed to publish. He had read it to
his friends and it contained some remarkable passages. With his German
gift of penetration, he had reached the heart of the matter, and
discovered that there are two kinds of conscience; first the natural,
and second the artificial. The first conscience, he maintained, was the
natural feeling of right. That was the conscience which had weighed on
him so heavily when he had the franc-tireurs shot. He could only free
himself from this by regarding himself persistently as a victim of the
upper classes. The artificial conscience again originated in the power
of habit and the authority of the upper classes. The power of habit
rested so heavily on Herr von Bleichroden that sometimes when he went
for a walk before noon he felt as though he had neglected his work in
the Geological Bureau, and became uneasy and restless, like a boy who
has played truant from school. He took incredible pains to exculpate
himself by the consideration that he had obtained lawful leave of
absence. But then he remembered vividly his room in the geological
department, his colleagues who kept a keen watch on each other in order
to discover a slip on another's part which might lead to their own
advancement; and the heads of the department anxiously on the look-out
for orders and distinction. He felt then as though he had absconded
from it all.

Sometimes too he was attacked by the official conscience which the
authority of the upper classes imposes on a man. He found it hard to
obey the first commandment--to love one's King and fatherland. The King
had plunged his fatherland into the misery of war in order to obtain
a new fatherland for a relative, i.e. to make a Spaniard out of a
Prussian.

Had the King shown love to his fatherland in this? Had kings, generally
speaking, loved their fatherland? England was ruled by a Hanoverian,
Russia was governed by a German Czar and would soon receive a Danish
empress, Germany had an English Crown-princess, France a Spanish
empress, Sweden a French king and a German queen.

If, following such high examples, people changed their nationality
like a coat, Herr von Bleichroden believed that cosmopolitanism would
have a brilliant future. But the commands of the authorities, which
did not accord with their practice, worried him. He loved his country
as a cat loves her warm place by the fire; but he did not love it as
an institution. Sovereigns find nations necessary to provide them with
conscript armies, as tax-payers and as supporters of the throne, for
without nations there would not be any royal houses.

After Herr von Bleichroden had resided two and a half years in
Switzerland, he received one day a summons from Berlin, for there
were rumours of war in circulation. This time it was Prussia against
Russia--the same Russia which three years previously had lent Prussia
its "moral support" against France. He did not think it conscientious
to march against his friends, and since he was quite sure that the two
nations wished each other no ill, he asked his wife's advice what he
should do in such a new dilemma, for he knew by experience that woman's
conscience is nearer the natural law of right than man's.

After a moment's reflection, she answered "To be a German is more than
to be a Prussian--that is why the German Confederation was formed; to
be a European is more than to be a German; to be a man is more than to
be a European. You cannot change your nation, for all 'nations' are
enemies, and one does not go over to the enemy unless one is a monarch
like Bernadotte or a field-marshal like Von Moltke. The only thing left
is to neutralise yourself. Let us become Swiss. Switzerland is not a
nation."

Herr von Bleichroden considered this such a happy and simple solution
of the difficulty that he at once set about making inquiries how he
could be neutralised. His surprise and delight can be imagined when
he found that he had already fulfilled all the conditions required to
become a Swiss citizen (for there are no underlings in that land!) as
he had resided two years there.

Herr von Bleichroden is now neutralised, and although he is very happy
he occasionally, though more seldom than before, has conflicts with his
conscience.




OVER-REFINEMENT


Sten Ulffot, a youth of twenty years, the last scion of the ancient
family of Ulffot, who possessed property in Wäringe, Hofsta and
Löfsala, awoke one sunny May morning towards the end of the year 1460
in his bedroom at Hofsta in Upland. After some hours of dreamless sleep
his rested brain began to review the events of the previous day, which
had been of such decisive importance for him that, still benumbed by
the blow, be stood as it were outside the whole affair and regarded
it with wonder. The bailiff and sheriff's officer had been there,
had shown mortgage-deeds of the house and estate, had read various
parchment documents, and the upshot of it all was that Sten, because
of his father's and his own debts, was reduced to abject poverty. And
since his father in his lifetime had not been a merciful man, the young
man must leave the old house, which was no longer his, the very next
day.

Sten, who had never taken life seriously, for the simple reason that
life had always been an easy matter for him, took this also very
easily. Poverty for him was simply an uttered word which as yet lacked
any corresponding reality. With a light heart he sprang out of bed,
and put on his only but handsome velvet jacket and his only pair of
breeches of Brabant cloth. He counted his few gold coins, and hid
them carefully in his bosom, for he had now caught some idea of their
importance. Then he went into the castle-room, which was quite empty.

The only impression this spacious room made on him was that he could
breathe more easily in it. Upon a table fastened to the wall were to be
seen damp rings--the traces left by the tankards of beer which the two
functionaries had used the day before; it occurred to him that there
would have been more rings if he had been with them himself--it looked
so stingy!

The sun threw the reflections of the painted windows on the floor, so
that they resembled beautiful mosaic work. His coat of arms, the wolf's
foot on a red ground, was repeated six times; he amused himself by
treading on the black foot, expecting to hear the wolf howl, but every
time he did so the reflection of the wolf's foot merely lay on his
yellow leather boots. When he took a step forward the reflection of
the foot flew up to his breast and on his white jacket the red shield
lay like a bleeding heart torn by the black paw with its outspread
claws. He felt his heart beat violently and left the room.

He climbed the narrow stone stairs to the upper story, which his
parents had occupied in their lifetime. There every possible movable
which makes a house into a home for living beings had been swept off
and carried away. The rooms looked like a series of burial chambers,
hewn out of one rock, intended for souls without bodies and without
corporeal needs. But signs of the life which had been there were still
remaining. Two grey spots on the floor showed where a bed had stood;
there were two dark lines where the table had been', and between them
were marks and scratches left by boots; a dark, irregular stain on the
white-washed wall showed where his father had been accustomed to rest
his head when he raised it from his work which lay on the table. Some
coals from the fire-place had fallen into the room and left dark spots
on the floor like those on a panther-skin.

In his mother's room was a stone image of the Virgin and Child fixed
to the wall; she regarded her Son with a look full of hope and without
any foreboding that she held a future condemned prisoner upon her
knees. Young Sten felt a vague depression and went on. Through a
secret door he mounted up into the attic and went out upon the roof.
Underneath him he saw the whole wide-stretching expanse of land which
till lately he had called his own: these green fields which once formed
the bottom of the sea, surrounded by small green hills once islands,
but lately wore their verdure on his account--to support the poor who
clothed him, brushed him, prepared his food, and tended his horses, his
hounds, his falcons and his cattle. In the previous autumn he had stood
here and watched them sow his corn; now others would come and cut and
gather it in. A little while ago it was his to decide when the fishes
in the streams should die, when the firs in the wood should be felled,
and when the game should be shot. Even the birds in this huge space of
air belonged to him, although they had flown hither from the realm of
the Emperor of Austria.

He could not yet grasp the fact that he possessed nothing more of all
this, for he had never missed anything and therefore did not know what
possession was; he only felt a huge emptiness and thought that the
landscape had a melancholy look. The swallows which had come that very
day flew screaming about him and sought their old nests in the eaves;
some found them, and others did not--the rains of autumn and snows
of winter had destroyed their little clay dwellings so that they had
fallen into the castle-moat.

But there was clay in the fields, water in the brooks and straw on
every hillock; as long as they were homeless they could find shelter in
every grove and under the thatch of every cottage. They hunted without
hindrance in their airy hunting grounds; they paired and wedded in the
blue spring weather which was full of the sweet scents of the newly
sprung birches, the honey-perfumed catkins of the osiers, and all the
invisible burgeonings of the spring. He went farther up on the roof
and stood by the pole that supported the dog-vane. As he looked up to
the white clouds of spring sailing by, it seemed to him as though he
stood on the aerial ship of a fairy-tale and were sailing among the
clouds, and when he looked down on the earth again it appeared like a
collection of mole-hills, a mere rubbish-heap cast out of heaven. But
he had a foreboding that he must go down and dig in the mole-hills in
order to find a living; he felt that his feet stood firm upon the
earth, although his glances wandered at will among the silver-gleaming
clouds.

As he descended the narrow attic stairs it seemed to him as though an
enormous gimlet were screwing him deeper and deeper into the earth.
He entered the garden and looked at the apple trees in blossom. Who
would pluck the fruits of these trees which he had cultivated and
tended for years? He looked at the empty stable; all his horses were
gone except a sorry nag, which he had never thought worth riding. He
went into the dog-house and saw only ten empty leash-straps. Then
his heart grew heavy, for he felt that he had been parted from the
only living creatures who loved him. All others--friends, servants,
farm-hands, tenants--had, as his poverty increased, gradually changed
their demeanour, but these ten had always remained the same. He was
astonished that he did not feel the blank so bitterly up there in the
ancestral castle with its memories, for he forgot that _that_ sense of
loss had long been obliterated by his tears.

He went into the courtyard of the castle. There a sight met his eyes
which made him realise his true situation. On a four-wheeled wagon,
to which three pairs of oxen were yoked, lay a heap of furniture
and household utensils; beneath all lay the great oak bedstead
splendidly carved, mighty clothes and linen chests constructed like
fortresses against thieves, his father's work-table, the family
dining-table, the chairs from the sitting-room with fragments of
torn-down, gaudy-coloured curtains, his mother's embroidery-frame,
his grandfather's chair with the cushioned arms and the high back,
and on the top of all his own cradle and the praying stool at which
his mother had so often prayed for her little one. Beside them were
bundles of lances, swords, and shields with which his forefathers had
once acquired and defended these goods which he must now leave behind
in order to go out into the world and earn his bread in the sweat of
his brow. All these dead things which, when in their places, had formed
parts of his own self lay there like corpses and up-torn trees showing
their roots; it was an enormous funeral pile of memories, which he
would have liked to set fire to.

Just then the gates grated on their hinges, the drawbridge was lowered,
the driver cracked his whip over the first pair of oxen, the ropes and
shafts of the cart creaked, and the heavily laden vehicle rattled away
on the stone-paved courtyard. As it rolled over the planks of the
wooden, bridge, there was a rumbling like the echo from a grave-vault.

"The last load?" called the driver to the gate-keeper.

"The last," came the answer from the vaulted gateway.

The word "last" made a deep impression on Sten, who felt himself to be
the last of his race, but he could not indulge in further reflections,
for a man whom he did not know stepped towards him holding the nag.

"The castle is to be shut up," he said.

"Why shut up?" asked Sten, merely to hear his own voice again.

"Because it is to be pulled down. The King does not wish to have so
many castles in the land."

Sten laid hold of the reins and mounted the nag; he pressed it with
his knees, and holding his head high, rode through the arched gateway.
There he took out his purse and threw a piece of gold behind him, which
the gate-keeper and the stable-man raced for.

When he had ridden over the drawbridge, he reined in his horse till
the cart with its load had disappeared from sight. Then he turned up a
narrow path and vanished among the birch trees.

"I wonder what he will do?" said the gate-keeper.

"Enlist," answered the stable-man.

"No, he is no good at that; he has learnt nothing but reading and
writing."

"Then he will become one of the King's secretaries."

"Not _this_ King's; his father was in disfavour for refusing to bear
arms against his fellow-countrymen."

"Then let him become what the devil he likes."

"One cannot become what one likes, one must become what one can; and if
one can do nothing, one becomes nothing."

"Just so it is! Just so! But I don't know what one has to learn in
order to become a gate-keeper."

"Well, one must be strong enough for it, and keep awake at night; and
that the young gentleman cannot do."

"Yes, he can keep awake at night, for we have seen him do it; but
perhaps he is not strong enough to draw the heavy chain."

"Well, stable-man, he must look after himself. Meanwhile I will draw up
the bridge, and then we can go the backway to the tavern, and change
our piece of gold, and he can do what he likes!"

"What he can, gate-keeper; one cannot do what one likes."

"Quite true! Quite true!"

The chain rattled, the bridge was drawn up, and the gate fell to with a
dull crash.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sten meantime had ridden for several hours without exactly knowing
whither. He only knew that the way led him out into the world, far
from the protection of home. He saw by the sun's position that it was
nearly afternoon, and by the nag's drooping head that it was tired; he
therefore dismounted, tied the reins loosely round one of the horse's
forelegs and led him up from the path to a fine upland meadow where he
left him loose to graze. Then he lay down under a wild apple tree to
rest, but since he felt that the ground was damp, he broke down some
young birches and made a bed out of their soft leaves; he also tore
off some long strips of bark and placed them under his head, knees and
elbows; then he went to sleep. But when he awoke he felt terrible pangs
of hunger, for he had eaten nothing during the last twenty-four hours;
he felt his tongue cleaving to his palate and a burning and tickling
feeling in his throat. The horse had disappeared. He did not know
where he was, could not see a human habitation, and had small hope of
finding an inn before nightfall. Then he fell on his knees and prayed
his patron-saint to help him. As he mentioned the name "St Blasius" it
occurred to him how the saint under similar circumstances had sustained
himself on roots and berries in the desert. Strengthened by prayer, he
looked round to see what there was to eat and drink. His eye first fell
on a birch. It was just the time of year when the sap flows. With his
knife he split off a piece of bark and fastened the corners together
with wood splinters so that it formed a water-tight basket; then he
bored a hole in the tree and from the hard wood trickled out the clear
sap resembling Rhine wine in colour. While it was trickling, he climbed
into the apple tree, where he had seen a large number of apples, which
had hung there all the winter and were certainly rotten but could at
any rate fill his stomach. When he had eaten some of them he began to
shake the tree, so that the apples fell on the ground. He was just on
the point of rejoicing at his discovery and looking forward to drink
the good birch wine when he heard a harsh voice calling from below;

"Hullo, Sir thief! what are you doing there?"

"I am no thief," answered Sten.

"He who steals is a thief," answered the voice. "Come down at once, or
you will spend the night in gaol."

Sten thought it belter to descend and try to explain himself. He found
himself before a man of authoritative appearance, who was accompanied
by a large dog.

"In the first place," said the man, "you have committed an outrage on
a fruit-bearing tree; punishment--three marks and forfeiture of the
axe--chapter seventeen of the forest laws."

"I thought one had a right to plunder wild trees," said Sten in a
shamefaced way, for he had never been addressed in this manner.

"There are no wild trees now, though it was certainly so in Adam and
Eve's time. Besides, I was purposely keeping the apples to flavour
cabbages with. Secondly, you have cut and extracted the sap from my
fine carriage-pole."

"Carriage-pole?"

"Yes, I intended to make a carriage-pole of the birch tree. Then you
have peeled off birch bark in a wood that did not belong to you; fine
--three shillings, according to the same chapter in King Christopher's
land-law."

"I thought I was in God's free world and had a right to support my
life," answered Sten mildly.

"God's free world? Where is that? I only know tax-free land, land that
is assessed, and crown lands. Thirdly, probably--I have no testimony
to that effect, but probably it is your horse which is feeding in my
meadow?"

"It is my horse, and I suppose it could not die of hunger while the
grass was growing round it."

"No one need die of hunger. Any animal can graze by the way-side,
everyone can pluck a handful of nuts, and every traveller can cut an
axle for his wheel when necessary. You are therefore convicted of
fourfold robbery, and I keep the horse."

"And leave me alone in the wood, where perhaps I cannot even kindle a
fire for the night."

"Whoever cuts dry wood on other people's land is liable to a fine of
three shillings each time. If it were not so, one could never be sure
of possessing anything."

"It never was so on my property. There we knew nothing of such laws and
paragraphs, and my manorial rights were never so niggardly as yours."

Here a great alteration took place in the bearing of the man of
authority. He took the horse by the rein, led it to Sten, held the
stirrup for him, bent one of his knees, and said:

"Sir, pardon me, I see you have ridden out for recreation and jest with
an old law-student. A few mouldy apples, I hope, will not make any
trouble between us."

Sten, who was a lover of sincerity, hesitated a moment before putting
his foot into the proffered stirrup, but as he was glad to be safely
out of the difficulty, he swung himself up on his saddle.

"Listen," he said in an authoritative tone, "where is the nearest inn?"

"Half a mile southwards, if your lordship is going to Stockholm."

"Good! Now I thank you for the amusement, and put a small question to
you. Tell me: if one steals out of necessity, then it is theft; and if
one steals to amuse oneself, what is that?"

"A joke."

"Good. But how is the judge to know whether it is a joke or earnest?"

"Oh, he can tell!"

Sten pressed his nag's sides with his legs, bent forward, and said:
"No, friend, he cannot."

The nag shot away like an arrow from the astonished law-student and his
carriage-pole.

The prospect of soon obtaining a meal, and the fortunate conclusion
of his adventure, had set Sten in a mood which banished gloomy
reflections. After a half-hour's trot he rode through the gate of the
inn, and was received like a gentleman of high rank. He sat down at a
table under a great hawthorn tree outside the house, and ordered a fowl
with sage stuffing and a jug of Travener beer. These the host promised
to get even if he had to run round the whole village for them.

The May evening was fine, and Sten ate and drank at his ease, though
he could not completely banish the alarm which the threatening attack
of hunger had just caused him. He could not get the scene with the
law-student out of his thoughts, and he felt that soon, when his fine
velvet jacket no more protected him, he would come under the hard laws
of necessity like any other ordinary man. He perceived that he must
certainly become a working member of human society, and join one of its
numerous classes if he wished to continue to live. The earth, with all
the products that she bore, was already fully occupied, so that one
of the lords of creation might lie on the ground and die of hunger
under a fruit-bearing tree if he did not wish to be hung, while the
birds of the air might eat their fill with impunity off the same tree.
He wondered that men let squirrels and jays plunder hazel bushes, and
preserve their freedom, while only in case of absolute need was a man
allowed to save his life with a handful of nuts. It seemed to him a
cruel contradiction; he might save his life, but not support it, and
every meal was as it were a recurrent saving of life. But on the other
hand his forefathers had founded these laws and he had himself employed
them. Who then was the proper object of his reproach? Was not the fault
partly his own, and were not the consequences quite natural?

While he was thus meditating, his eyes were fixed upon a figure which
was approaching the garden of the inn from the highway. As it came
nearer, Sten saw a man of about thirty with a dark complexion, long
arms, and knees and feet curving inwards as though he were afflicted
with spavin. Over his shoulder he carried a sack, and in his hand
a knotted stick. With a jerk he flung the sack on the table close
to Sten, sat down and struck on the table with the stick so sharply
that it sounded like a pistol-shot. At the same time he called into
the house, "Come out, Mr Innkeeper, and give a worthy member of the
worshipful company of blacksmiths in Stockholm a jug of beer."

The innkeeper, who thought that some important person had come,
hastened out, but when he saw the fellow he turned round and said to
Sten in a disdainful tone: "These fellows never have money. I will give
him nothing." "By St Michael, the archangel and St Loyus, innkeeper, if
you don't give me beer I will set my mark upon you," broke in the man,
and lifted his stick.

"If you threaten, you will be hung for compelling hospitality," said
the innkeeper; "you did not pay the last time you were here, so pick
up your sack and take yourself off, for the clerk of assize is sitting
inside."

"I will pay for his beer, innkeeper," interrupted Sten, who felt a
certain sympathy with the unmasked braggart.

"The gentleman is kind and understands a traveller's needs. As regards
payment, I think it is all the same who pays. To-day it is my turn,
to-morrow yours. In good company I never say 'no.' And a member of
the worshipful company of blacksmiths at Stockholm can be as good a
gentleman as any other, or any traveller, with your permission."

"You are right, sir; all things considered, we are all travellers, and
when we travel we are all alike."

The blacksmith, who had received his jug of beer, lifted it, took his
cap off, and said in a solemn voice, "Saint Michael and Saint Loyus!"
Then he threw back his head and took some tremendously deep draughts
of the beer, so that the muscles of his neck moved like the backs of
snakes. Then he collected his breath, raised the jug once more and
said, "Pledge me a toast, sir, with your permission." Then he drank for
some minutes so that his neck sinews were strained like harness-straps.
When he had finished, he emptied out the last drops, struck the table
with his stick, and called into the house, "Two full jugs! Now I am the
inviter."

"And the young gentleman pays?" asked the host.

Sten nodded assent, and the blacksmith continued, "It is all the same
who pays. '_Commune bonum_,' as we say in the shop. To-day it is my
turn, to-morrow yours."

"Sit down, sir, and let us talk," said Sten. "You are a blacksmith, I
hear."

"Banner-bearer to the worshipful company of blacksmiths in Stockholm,
thanks to St Michael and St Loyus, with your permission!"

"Tell me, is your trade hard?"

"Hard! Well, it is not for anyone. It is the hardest work there is.
It is a trade which the world cannot dispense with. No one can get on
without a blacksmith. Believe me when I say it. The Emperor of Rome
had a councillor whose name was Vulcant and it was he who invented the
blacksmith's art. And you ask if it is difficult!"

"Yes, but one could learn it," said Sten, who felt more amused than
convinced.

"Learn it? No, sir, one cannot."

"But you have learnt it," insisted Sten.

"I! With me it is another matter," answered the blacksmith,
contemplating the bottom of his mug.

"Well, why cannot it be another matter with me also?" objected Sten.

"Show me your fists, if you please, sir."

Sten laid two small white hands on the table.

The smith grinned. "They are no use. Look at mine." He took the pewter
pot in a giant's grasp and squeezed it till it became as slender as an
hour-glass.

Sten was still not convinced. "But you were not born with such fists,"
he said.

"Yes, sir, I was. I was born to be a blacksmith, just as you were
born--to do nothing, if you will allow me to say so. What do you expect
to do in the world with such mere pegs? You had better not depend on
them or you will be disappointed."

"And yet I am thinking of becoming a blacksmith," said Sten innocently.

"You must not make a jest of that worshipful fraternity, sir. Besides,
I should like to say that the times are different to what they were
formerly; a blacksmith may become mayor or councillor, and Sir Vulcan,
whom I mentioned just now, was one of the Emperor of Austria's
councillors. One should not be proud, even if one is of high birth.
King Karl Knutsson was King one day and the next day he was nothing. If
he had learnt something, he would have been something."

"That is just what I wanted to say, dear smith. And I may as well say
that I am not a gentleman though I have a velvet jacket."

"Is it a disguise? Aren't you a real gentleman?"

"I have been one, but now I am nothing."

The blacksmith drew up the corners of his mouth, came nearer, surveyed
Sten and continued: "Come down in the world? What! Downhill? Eh! Hard
times! When thieves fall out, honest folk come by their own. Yes, yes.
No relations. No fine friends. Alone in the world. Obliged to work. And
now you want to become a blacksmith, when you can't be anything else."

"If I can become one."

"No, you can become nothing. That is less than you are, Claus. (My
name is Claus.) Now you can be proud, Claus. But I am not proud, and
therefore I invite you again to the jug of beer to which I invited you
just now. Was the fowl there good; it looks to me lean." Claus made a
movement as though he were chewing something tough.

Sten answered: "The fowl was fat enough; will you have some?"

"If I can be quite sure that it is good; otherwise I don't care about
it, for if I spend money I want to have something really good for it."

Sten ordered a fowl and fresh jugs of beer, and recommenced the
conversation. "I hope you will recommend me to your guild or company."

"I will see what I can do, but one has to proceed warily with those
gentlemen. Congratulate yourself that you have made acquaintance with
the banner-bearer of the guild, for he is a powerful gentleman,
although he goes round with a sack when he is on his journeys."

Sten, who was not accustomed to so much beer, at any rate of the sort
which was served here, began to feel sleepy and rose up in order to go
to his bedroom. But Claus could by no means He induced to agree to this.

"No, stay sitting, my dear," he said, "and drink a glass of wine with
me. It is such a fine evening and you have not far to go to tied. If
you get sleepy, I will carry you up the stairs."

But Sten could not possibly drink any more. Claus was annoyed and asked
if he refused to drink with the guild's banner-bearer. Sten asked to
be excused, but Claus would not consent. He said that Sten was proud,
and should take care, for pride was always punished. Sten was so sleepy
that he could hardly understand what was said, and clambered up the
stairs to the attic where in the darkness he sought for a cushion, on
which he fell asleep at once.

He had, as he thought, slept for quite twenty-four hours when he felt a
burning sensation as though sparks of fire had fallen on his face. He
sat up and found that the whole room was full of the hateful humming
of a swarm of gnats which had gained admission. When he had somewhat
shaken off his sleep, he could distinguish men's voices, and loudest
among them the deep voice of his friend Claus.

"Oh, he is a devilish fine fellow. His father and I are very old
friends. He has been a little spoilt by wearing fine clothes and so
on, but we will soon drive it out of him. Innkeeper, more claret! Yes,
you see his father was in my debt, and I waited. Take what you like,
parish-clerk!"

Sten sprang up and saw through a chink in the wall how Claus sat at the
end of the table and carried on a conversation with the innkeeper and a
stranger, who was probably the parish-clerk. The table was covered with
jugs and pots, and the party did not seem to have suffered from thirst.

The parish-clerk, who thought that the smith had talked long enough,
now led the conversation. "Listen, Claus; you say that he is nothing,
that he has no occupation and no money. Do you know what one calls such
a gentleman?"

"No, no."

"Well, one calls him a tramp. And do you know what the law says about
vagabond tramps?"

"No, no."

"It says that whoever chooses may take such a tramp by the collar
and put him in gaol. And that is right, thoroughly right. God, you
see, from the beginning, has created men to work, do service, and make
themselves useful----"

"Or to be rich," interrupted the innkeeper.

"Hush! Don't interrupt me--to make themselves useful in one way or
another. Suppose," continued he, "that there are men who will not work;
suppose that there are people who prefer to live at the expense of
other people----"

Claus gave him a sharp look and seized his stick. But after taking a
drink, the parish-clerk continued: "Then I ask--what is one to do with
such people? Can anyone answer me?"

The innkeeper was about to answer, but the parish-clerk motioned him
away with his left hand.

"Can anyone answer this? No, I say, for we know in part and prophesy
in part. _Cur tuus benevolentium_." He finished his mug and got up in
order not to spoil the effect of his speech by a bad translation of the
Latin.

Sten lay down again and put his head under his pillow. It seemed to him
that he had slept another four-and-twenty hours when he was aroused
by a foot pushing his bed very emphatically. He sat up and saw by the
light of the dawn, which fell through a crevice in the wall, that
his friend Claus, who apparently did not venture to stoop, stood on
one foot, and laying hold of a beam was feeling in the bed with his
foot for his sleeping friend. He accompanied this search with short
exclamations--"You! you!" When he caught sight of Sten's face in the
dim light he drew his foot back and said: "Do you know what you are,
you? Do you know that you are a tramp? Do you know that you will be put
into gaol if you do not eat someone else's bread, seeing you have none
of your own. I tell you the sheriff is after you, and if you are not
off by sunrise you will be imprisoned. Do you understand?"

Sten understood that there was a very good chance of it, as he had
already overheard their talk; but he did not understand that one could
not go one's own way to seek work, and Claus exerted himself in vain
in order to explain to him that one must have work or be the possessor
of such and such a sum. Sten, who feared imprisonment most of all, let
himself be easily persuaded to take his horse out of the stable and
to hand over some of his gold coins to Claus, who promised to settle
with the innkeeper. The latter was quite willing, for he himself was
liable to no less a punishment for having given lodging to a tramp.
Sten shook the good blacksmith's hand, and promised to look him up in
Stockholm.

Now he rode again on his horse, shaken out of his sleep, chased out of
a casual lodging, flying from the danger of imprisonment, and firmly
resolved to seek no other shelter till he reached the capital.

Two days later, on a Saturday afternoon, Sten reined in his horse on
the top of the Brunkebergsasen ridge, on the side where it descends
towards the Norrstrom River. Beneath him he saw for the first time
the capital, the battle-field whereon struggles for power were waged.
On these little rocky islands between the two water-courses, closely
encircled by towers and walls, lived the population among whom he
wished to enrol himself. The battle between King Karl Knutsson and
Archbishop Jöns Bengtsson was at its height, but to Sten it was
a matter of indifference who won, for his father had fallen into
disfavour with the King, and his family had an old feud with the
Archbishop. As the evening sun cast its horizontal rays on the flag
which waved from the chief tower of the castle, he saw the arms of the
Bondes--the boat against a white background--and knew how the land lay.

Although peace seemed to have been concluded for the time, the
difficulty of entering the city gate was not less than before. He
would in any case be obliged to give his name and to be registered,
and perhaps have to say why he came and where he came from. In his
tired mood he fancied he saw a thousand difficulties rise and the walls
growing in height till they appeared insurmountable. He felt like a
besieger who was thinking of a stratagem by means of which to enter the
city. It was there he hoped to find the only place where he could earn
his bread by means of the book-learning which he had acquired.

As he was sitting on the hill, lost in these serious meditations, he
heard from the foot of it a sound of merry voices mingled with the
music of trumpets and flutes. At the angle of the walls before the
Klara Convent issued forth a gay stream of folk, disappearing and
reappearing from behind the kitchen-gardens on the slope of the Bill.
The procession drew nearer. At its head rode a youth, with a garland
on his brow and a long spear-shaft wreathed with green in his hand. He
was followed by pipers and trumpeters with gooseberry leaves in their
caps; after him came a whole crowd of people with black cloth masks and
red wooden masks, dressed in the most fantastic garb after Greek and
Roman patterns; last of all, riding backwards on a sorry jade, a youth
dressed in fur, with loosely streaming hair and beard, to represent
winter. It was the procession of the "May-lord," greeting the advent of
spring in the Klara district.

Sten seized the opportunity by the forelock, rode down the hill, and
joined the procession. He passed through the gateway without being
interfered with, although he thought he saw a pair of sharp eyes
fastened on him under the archway itself. Meanwhile he could not help
thinking how the guard's over-hasty inference "Cheerful people are not
dangerous"--had been of use to him, who felt anything but cheerful. He
felt easier in mind when he had passed through the gates of both the
bridges.

The procession halted in the great market-place, where it broke up
in order to reassemble in the restaurant of the town hall. This had
received special permission to remain open all night, since the
postponed May festival was being celebrated now because of the late
spring and the King's victory.

Sten took up his quarters at an inn in the Dominicans' street, which
bore an image of St Laurence painted on its signboard. When his horse
had been placed in the stable he was shown up to the sleeping chamber.
There he found a great number of beds without any chairs, and as the
evening seemed too beautiful to remain indoors, he went out into the
city in order to take a bath.

When he came out into the street again, he became somewhat depressed
at seeing the narrow passages, called "streets," in which pale-faced
people walked, breathing unwholesome air and treading in the dirt and
kitchen offal thrown out of the doorways. The crowd kept streaming to
and fro, and he wondered that they never came to an end nor seemed
weary. The street itself, which was paved with rough cobbles, was
difficult to walk on, and he did not understand why men should have
gathered together these instruments of torture to make the way more
stony than it naturally was. Of the sky there was only a grey strip to
be seen between the rows of houses, and the high corbel-step gables
rose like Jacob's-ladders, on which souls sought in vain to rise to the
heights from their dark, evil-smelling dungeons.

He felt confused and astray. At one moment he was jostled by a porter,
at another trod on by a horse; then he knocked his head against a
window-board. All these people had crowded together on a little island
and built on each other like bees in a honeycomb. Why? For mutual aid?
He did not believe it.

After inquiring his way to the public baths in the Allmännings Gata,
he felt a keen desire to free himself by a bath from the sensation of
uncleanness which even the air he breathed oppressed him with. In the
undressing-room which was shared by all, he found a great number of
people of all classes, for it was Saturday evening. In the uncertain
light he could not see them distinctly, but the pungent odour of
perspiration exhaling from their bodies after severe physical labour,
made him shudder. He undressed, put on bathing-drawers, and entered the
bathroom.

In the midst of it stood an enormous walled fire-place in which a great
fire was burning; round it, up to the roof, ran wooden galleries where
men sat--some beating each other with rods, others drinking beer.
Great stalwart women with tucked-up skirts poured jugs of water on the
fire-place, which at once sent out clouds of steam. These the bathers
allowed to envelop them, amid loud shrieks and laughter. One caught
glimpses of naked bodies, matted beards and shining eyes. And what
bodies! They seemed to Sten like a number of wild beasts with hairy
breasts and limbs who did not need clothing, and those who, while
they waited for their bath, danced before the fire reminded him of
fairy-tales of distant lands where men walked with their heads under
their arms and with one eye in their foreheads. He could not make up
his mind to address any of them, though they were human beings like
himself, but with a difference. They did not talk like him; they did
not laugh like him; they were not shaped like him. The bones of their
backs looked like the letter X, and their feet were turned inwards
so that the toes met; nightwork and heat had rendered their faces
emaciated. Was it through willing sacrifice for their fellow-men that
they made themselves cripples, or were they compelled by necessity to
do so? These smiths with shoulder-blades like knapsacks, with arms as
long as the helve of a sledge-hammer, with the soles of their feet
flattened and distorted; these tailors with thin chests, crooked legs
as slender as sticks, and bent backs--were they conscious that their
deformity set off the handsome appearance of others?

For a moment his aesthetic Sense was offended and he wished to go,
but he was restrained by the thought that he must also soon perhaps
undergo some similar deformity in order to perform his duty in this
society into which he was now forced to enter as a retribution for his
ancestors' mistake in withdrawing him from the lot which all were born
to share. But the peasants, fishermen, and huntsmen he had formerly
known, did not look like these! The former were like the trees of
the wood, straight though knotted. Here in the working life of the
town some mistake had been made, but he could not say what. He shyly
approached one of the giantesses and asked if he could have a water
bath.

The old woman looked at his white skin and his small hands and pushed
him into a smaller room, where some empty bath-tubs stood on the ground.

"He is certainly a fine gentleman's son," she said, regarding him
critically. "He has evidently come to the wrong place, but that does
not matter." She laid the youth in the bath as though he were a child,
and began to rub his skin with a horsehair brush.

"No! that will make holes in his skin, one can see. Yes, men are so
different from each other. A foot like a girl's; one can see how the
blood runs in the veins. I am sure that these fine folk have not the
same blood as we. And such hands! Pure as those of St John which they
have made of wax in Our Lady's chapel. They are not made to lay hold of
with."

When the bath was ended, the old woman set Sten on a stool and dried
him carefully, as though she were afraid of breaking one of his limbs.
Then she took a comb and began to do his fair hair, talking to herself
the while. "Pure silk and gold! One might weave a mass-robe for the
Bishop from this hair!"

Then a gnat flew in through the window-opening and settled on Sten's
bare shoulder; it had not long to look in order to find a place into
which to sink its sting, for his skin was milk-white and soft after the
warm bath.

The old woman stopped in her task, and observed almost with alarm how
the uninvited parasite bled the fine gentleman; she saw how the gnat's
transparent body filled itself with clear red blood, and how it lifted
its front leg as if to seize its prey firmly. Then the giantess seized
with the tips of her nails the little blood-letter by its wings and
held it against the light.

"What is that?" asked Sten, and made a movement.

The old woman was too deep in her contemplation to answer at once. At
last she said, "Ob, it was a gnat!"

"Which has got noble blood in its vein," broke in Sten. "Now do you
think, old woman, that it is better than the other gnats?"

"That one cannot exactly know," said the giantess, still examining her
captive. "Blood is thicker than water. I have seen many gnats in my
time, but this one is something unusual. I should like to let it live."

"And to see how it would give itself airs over the other gnats. You
would like to see it propagate young lord and lady gnats who would sit
on silk and let themselves be fed by others. No, you shall see that it
is just as plebeian as all the others, and that it has the same blood
as you and can die as easily as its companion gnats outside."

He struck the old woman's finger with his hand, and there appeared only
a bright red spot of blood upon it.

"Now was it not as I said?" she exclaimed. "It is as bright as red
gold."

"That is because it is thinner," said Sten, "therefore it will soon
be like pure water; and therefore you see the nobles will die and the
serfs will live."

The conversation was over and Sten rose up, thanked his attendant, and
went into the great bathroom where the noise was deafening owing to
the beer and the heat combined. He hastened by the bathers into the
undressing-room, where he found his clothes with difficulty under piles
of leather trousers, smocks, and vests.

When he came out into the street he directed his steps through the
Merchants' Gate to the Great Market. There he saw the town hall lit up;
the great door which led to the underground restaurant was decorated
with fir branches, weapons and flags. He descended the broad staircase,
attracted by the music of violins, flutes, and trumpets. Although he
did not think it reasonable that men should collect to enjoy themselves
underground, when the earth itself was so spacious and beautiful, yet
he felt bound to confess that the restaurant of the town hall presented
an imposing appearance with its huge pillars which this evening were
decked with garlands of fir twigs and bunches of liver-wort, anemones
and cowslips. Enormous beer and wine barrels, arranged in rows, formed
three great alleys running from the tap-room, which was adorned by a
huge figure of Bacchus riding on a cask. In tubs filled with sand stood
young firs and junipers, and the ground was strewn with cut fir twigs.
The musicians sat on a gigantic barrel, and from the vaulted roof
hung barrel-hoops with oil-lamps and wax-lights. An enormous number
of people, half in disguise, half in their holiday clothes, stood in
groups round the tables or walked down the tub-lined alleys. The joy
seemed universal and genuine, for it had a natural cause--the arrival
of spring, and a less natural one--the return of the King for the third
time.

Sten wandered lonely among the festive groups, without the hope of
meeting a friend. He felt thirsty after his bath but was ashamed to ask
for anything, for he did want to drink alone. But as he walked he grew
suddenly conscious that someone was looking at him. He turned round
and saw a little yellow, dried-up, narrow-chested man who for want of
a table had sat down by an upturned barrel and taken a smaller one for
a seat. He had before him a stone jug filled with Rhenish wine and two
small green wine-glasses. He was alone and only drank out of one glass.

"Will the young gentleman sit down?" he asked in a weak, sibilant
voice, beginning at once to cough. "I see the young gentleman is alone,
and so am I."

Sten looked interrogatively at the empty glass, but the coughing man
answered his question by bringing an unoccupied barrel which he offered
him to sit on.

"I have a terrible cough," said the yellow man, "but don't let that
disturb you. The spring-time is always trying for those with weak
chests. It is now spring again," he added in the melancholy voice with
which one might say "It is now autumn again."

Sten felt obliged to say something. "You should drink sweet wine
instead of sour."

"My chest complaint is not of that kind," he answered, and began to
cough again by way of demonstrating the fact. "I am a clerk in the
cloth factory of the town, and there one gets this kind of cough. The
dust of the wool affects the lungs and the workers do not live beyond
thirty-six. I am now thirty-five," he added with caustic humour, and
emptied his glass.

"Why don't you choose another occupation?" asked Sten in a friendly
and child-like way.

"Choose? One doesn't choose, young sir. Society in the city is a
building in which each man is a stone fitted into its place; if he
moves, he disturbs the whole edifice. But society has committed an
oversight by not forbidding men in my position to marry. For if the
fathers cannot marry till they are thirty and die at thirty-six, the
children must go under." He pointed to the ground and continued: "You
see, it is a human instinct to climb up; by 'up' one means freedom
from work. That is what we climb and struggle for. There are two
methods of getting up--an honourable and a dishonourable. The latter is
the easier but may end with a crash. I have always been honest."

The drummer standing on the great barrel beat a roll-call on his drum,
which signified that someone was about to make a speech.

A heavily built man now mounted a decorated cask. He wore a tunic edged
with fur, with a red cloth lining and a round fur cap--a garb which was
more adapted for outward appearance than for warmth. It was the mayor.

"Now the King's health will be proposed," explained the factory clerk.
"This is the third time that he proposes it, and three times already
he has cursed the King and drunk to the health of the Archbishop and
the Danish King. A true citizen, you see, drinks to whichever power
is in the ascendant, for that power always protects trade, and a city
consists of tradesmen; the others do not count."

Sten caught isolated words of the mayor's speech while the clerk
continued to whisper in his ear:

"A middleman sits in a comfortable room. He has a letter written to
the seller and asks the price. Then he has a letter written to the
buyer and asks what he will give. And so the bargain is concluded
through him. If the buyer and seller could meet and do their business
directly, no middlemen would be necessary, but that they cannot,
for then there would be no so-called privileges. And privileges are
bestowed by the ruling power."

Outbursts of applause interrupted both the speech of the mayor and the
whisperings of the clerk. When the speech was ended all raised their
glasses and cried "Long live the King!"--all except the clerk, who
stood up and flung his glass against the barrel on which the speaker
stood.

An outcry, like a sudden outbreak of fire, rose from the whole company,
and in a few seconds the rebellious clerk was carried backwards
by strong arms towards the restaurant stairs. There Sten saw him
disappear, coughing violently the while. The shrill sound of his cough
pierced through the uproar and the roll of the drums which had struck
up.

The mayor again desired permission to speak, this time through the city
trumpeter, and announced that on this joyous occasion of the King's
return, the town and the council would give wine freely. A barrel of
wine was rolled along, and placed on a seat amid universal approval.

But now there came a new diversion. From one of the many side-rooms
which were generally hired for marriages and other private festivities,
came a marriage procession with violin-players and torch-bearers at its
head, intending to pass through the great hall and accompany the newly
wedded pair home. But that was not possible. The excitement was too
great to allow such an opportunity to pass unchallenged.

"Dance the bride's crown off!" was the cry, and the next moment all the
young men had formed a circle round the bride, separating her from the
bridegroom. The bride was a blooming girl of twenty and the bridegroom
was a withered-looking man of thirty with the same sickly pallor as the
factory clerk, whom he otherwise somewhat resembled.

Sten's curiosity was directed towards the deserted bridegroom, and he
did not understand why he felt a certain sympathy with him, though it
was his happiest day. Meanwhile the bride had been blindfolded. Sten
was drawn into the ring of dancers, which at one moment circled with
dizzying rapidity and at another stood still. The bride stretched
out her arms and caught Sten round the neck; he fell on one knee,
blushing, kissed her hand, and entered the ring with a garland on his
head to dance with the bride, who seemed flattered by such unusual
attention. Then he stepped up to the bridegroom, paid him some
compliments about his bride, and asked permission to drink to his
prosperity. Although it was annoying to the latter to be stopped in
this way, he could not refuse, and briefly informed Sten that he also
was a clerk in the cloth factory. Sten could not resist giving a start
of sympathetic surprise, but had no time to observe the bridegroom more
closely, for the latter was now drawn into the ring and had to dance
with the bride. Sten underwent a strange sensation and thought of the
death-dance depicted on the walls of the chapel of his father's castle.
"Poor bridegroom!" he thought, "and poor girl!"

But the joy this evening was quite beyond all bounds, and now tables
and seats were cleared away, for the bride's-maids were about to dance
the torch-dance, which had been specially called for and which was
customary at weddings. The girls received the torches from the bride's
escort and invited their cavaliers to dance by handing the torches to
them.

Sten had drawn back in order to rest after his exertions, and stood
with his back against the cold wall regarding the bridegroom in a
melancholy way, as the latter with wine-flushed cheeks fluttered
uneasily about the bride, who was surrounded by a number of young men.
He felt himself again so lonely among the excited crowd; the various
impressions he had undergone during the last twenty-four hours rose up
like shadows, and his tired senses began to give way. He closed his
eyes and it became dark; the ground seemed to sink under his feet,
and he felt a singing in his ears as though he were drowning. He made
a supreme effort to hold himself up, and opened his eyes, but saw at
first only a dark moving mass in front of him; gradually this was
reduced to order and a point of light was kindled against the dark
background. It broadened, came nearer, assumed a shape, and then, as
when a curtain is quickly drawn back from a picture, a radiant woman's
form appeared before him. She was pure light; her eyes were like the
Virgin Mary's, her hair resembled silver or gold--it was difficult
to say which, her small face was warm and white like newly washed wool.
In one hand she held a torch, which she reached to Sten, who took it
mechanically, while at the same time he took her free hand which she
extended to him. It was all like a vision. As he looked at her small
while hand, which lay so confidingly in his, the latter seemed to him,
in comparison, like that of the giantess in the bathroom.

Sten had to open the dance. Room was made for them, and he and his
partner began to thread the swaying crowd. At one moment they parted
from one another, then they met again; one instant he put his arm round
her and pressed her to his heart, then another cavalier came and took
her from him; but whatever happened, they always met again, and he
lighted her way with his uplifted torch. Every time they met again he
wished to say something complimentary, but he was dumb and could not
utter a word when he looked into her eyes. He was lost in wonder at the
whiteness of her hand and the smallness of her foot; the latter peeped
forth from under her looped-up dress, and with the well-arched instep
was so clearly visible throughout the thin silk shoe that her toes
might have been counted. A princess accustomed to walk on roses might
have envied the middle-class maiden her foot.

When the dance ceased and Sten had laid down his torch, his partner
hesitated for a moment, as though she wished to say something or to ask
Sten to speak. Sten, however, felt as though his tongue were paralysed;
but quick as lightning and without considering what he was doing, he
embraced her neck and kissed her on both cheeks as one kisses a sister.

There at once arose an uproar among the wedding-guests, and Sten found
himself surrounded by threatening hands and angry looks. But the other
guests thought the pair so handsome, and Sten looked so innocent as he
stood there blushing at his boldness, that they intervened and made
peace. The others insisted on a punishment. Then an elderly man, a
town-councillor of a cheerful disposition, stepped forward and declared
that the offender should be punished on the spot, but that, because of
the freedom allowed on this particular day, the law was willing to wink
at his offence. On the other hand the insulted maiden, the daughter of
a respectable clerk in the public weighing-house, should, if, he added
jestingly, she had really been so much insulted, herself adjudicate
in the matter. His proposal was accepted with unanimous applause; but
Sten felt discomposed to see his princess metamorphosed into a clerk's
daughter.

The young girl was embarrassed to the verge of tears, and could not
utter a word. At last one of her young friends pressed forward and
whispered something in her ear. This advice, whispered at the moment
of need, seemed to revive the spirits of the despairing umpire, and
with almost inaudible voice she pronounced her verdict "The young
gentleman must sing!"

"A song! A song!" shouted the emotional throng, and Sten was condemned
to do so. He was lifted by strong arms on to the table and was handed
a tortoise-shell lute, which one of the Italian painters, who at that
time resided in the city, had brought with him. No one inquired whether
the victim could sing, for all assumed that a young man of good family
could do so.

Sten first played a prelude on the strings while he recovered himself
from his embarrassment and the crowd at his feet heaved like a troubled
sea. What should he sing? The smells of beer, wine and fir twigs,
mingled with fumes from the oil-lamps and wax-lights, filled the air
and made him half unconscious. Before his eyes loomed a chaos of red
faces, lamps, casks, instruments and flowers. His fingers wandered over
the chords but his ear could not find the tune he wanted. There was
silence at last, but the many-headed beast which was now looking up to
him so expectantly might, the next moment stir, lose patience, and tear
him in pieces. Then he saw the blue eyes and white cheeks which still
bore the red marks of his kisses; the strings of the lute sounded, and
he felt chorda in his breast which responded. After striking some loud
notes, he began, in a weak voice which grew stronger as he went on, a
song in the style of the old Minnesingers, and when he had concluded
it he was fully acquitted by the audience. Then the good-natured
councillor stepped up to him, thanked him, put his arm round his neck,
and walked with him into one of the side-rooms. Here he placed him on a
seat, and standing before him with folded arms, he assumed a judicial
tone and said: "That was the song, young gentleman; now let us have the
words! You have some trouble on your mind, you are not on the right
road, and you steal into the town without a pass--you see, we watch our
people and they are not too many to be counted."

Sten was beside himself with alarm, but the councillor quieted him,
asked him to relate his story, and promised to be his friend. When
Sten perceived that the facts must come out in any case, he chose the
present favourable opportunity to narrate them privately to a friendly
person, knowing that perhaps to-morrow, when the effects of wine had
ceased to work, his friendliness might have evaporated. Accordingly he
frankly told the councillor everything.

When he had ended, the latter said, "Well, you are looking for an
occupation which is suited to your strength and capacity. You can
write, and, as it happens, the city just needs a clerk, for a place
will be vacant this evening."

"In the cloth factory?" asked Sten, with a gloomy foreboding that the
answer would be in the affirmative.

"Yes."

"The unfortunate man has then been dismissed for his imprudence?"

"Naturally! The city is the key of the kingdom; those who guard the
key-cupboard must not be surrounded by traitors."

"I cannot accept the post," declared Sten, remembering the kindness
which the unfortunate man had shown him. "'One man dead gives another
man bread!'"

"You are ashamed of walking over corpses? But what is our pilgrimage
here but a fight for life or death, or a lyke-wake where one sits and
waits till the body is carried out. How did I become a councillor? By
waiting for the deaths of six others. How shall I become mayor? By
waiting for the present mayor's death. And that may be a long time,"
he added with a sigh. "As regards the dismissed man, I am very sorry
for him, but am glad at the same time that you will be saved from going
under."

"But he has wife and children."

"Very sad for them! But when a man has renounced his place, as he
has done, it is vacant; if you refuse to take it, you will be doing
neither him nor yourself a service. Between ourselves, we all thought
somewhat as he did, but, look you! one must not say so. I am an old
man, sir, and have seen life. It is a perverse and mad business, and
Satan himself cannot help one. At present your velvet jacket is white,
but to-morrow it will be dirty; the day after, it will be torn, and
then, do you know what you are? No longer a young gentleman, but an
adventurer and a tramp. Hear my advice, young man. Get bread for your
mouth so long as your velvet jacket lasts, and hold your tongue. Sleep
over the matter and come on Monday morning to the town hall. I wish you
good night and common sense."

Sten rose and returned to the great hall. But it seemed to him empty
and desolate now that the bridal procession had vanished. Tired and
exhausted by the various emotions he had undergone during the evening
and the past twenty-four hours, he resolved to go home.

When he came to the inn and entered his room, he took off his velvet
jacket and inspected it. Stained with wine, dirty with the dust of
the high road, browned with sweat under the arm-pits, it looked
wretched enough. He lay down and went to sleep wondering where the
weighing-house might be; he dreamt of death-dances and factory clerks,
fought with corpses, and awoke. Then he went to sleep again thinking of
the weighing-house and of a tender farewell to the velvet jacket, with
a firm resolve to earn bread, first for one month, and then for two.

       *       *       *       *       *

The beautiful month of May did not keep its promises; snow fell while
the apple trees were in blossom, and the sun did not appear for
fourteen days. For fourteen dreadful days had Sten, the last scion of
the family of Ulffot at Wäringe, Hofsta and Löfsala, stood at his post
in the draughty, unwarmed factory by the harbour. From morning till
late in the evening he had stood there, with a pen in his half-frozen
fingers, registering the names of the kinds of cloth which had been
brought by the incoming vessels. He did not really understand why they
should be registered any more than if they had been so many stones of
the street, flakes of snow, or drops of water; but he obeyed the old
councillor's advice, and held his tongue whenever he felt tempted to
ask.

The room where he worked was continually being entered by porters and
merchants who left snow and dirt on the floor, and let the cold air
blow in freely. One bale of cloth after another was thrown upon an
enormous table and filled the air with a choking dust. He had not yet
begun to cough, but he felt that he breathed with more difficulty; and
to add to his troubles, the intense cold had burnt holes in his white
hands and made them quite red.

One day he went to a barber's and looked at himself in a mirror. He
thought it was another person he was looking at when he saw a lean
yellow face full of spots and fringed with an untidy beard. His feet
had become so swollen that he could not wear his ordinary boots, but
had to use Lapland shoes. He had changed his white jacket for a brown
frock-coat and his cap for a slouched hat. His scanty pay obliged him
to take his meals in third-rate restaurants where he only got salted
food, and the unaccustomed diet had brought on an attack of scurvy.
When he once ventured to complain to one of his senior fellow-workers,
the latter took him to task and said there were many who worked more
than Sten and got no food at all; he himself had had no fresh food
since Christmas. This man was the bridegroom whom Sten had met in the
restaurant of the town hall; he was envious of Sten because the latter,
while still so young, had obtained a post for which he had been waiting
for ten years.

"Many get everything given them in this life, and yet are not
satisfied," he often remarked when consoling Sten. The latter envied
hint because of his comparatively good health, his uninjured hands and
feet, and the indifference with which he took things. He on his part
declared that Sten suffered because he had been spoilt and had not
learned to work, and from this opinion he would not budge.

Sten felt that his bodily health was giving way under the struggle;
his friend said that it was a fall in an honourable battle of which no
knight need be ashamed. Sten thought that his soul was being injured by
the murderous work of perpetually writing figures; however, his friend
asserted it was not the fault of the work but because he had been badly
educated.

Badly educated! He who had had two nurses and a governess, he who
had had tutors in Greek and Latin, could play the lute, and make
fine verses! That he would not acknowledge. But he knew that he was
unhappy. He also knew now where the weighing-house was. But what was
the use of that? He had seen the young girl at a Mass in the city
church, but she had been shocked at his appearance; and his friend in
the cloth factory told him that she thought Sten looked degenerated.
His friend also told him that her father had some money, gave his
daughter an education, and hoped to get her well married, so that it
was not worth while for Sten to wear out his boots by going there, he
added.

One day Sten, weary of copying figures, felt he had had enough of the
dark room. Better, he thought, any physical exertion than this eternal
writing in which there was no progress and no end. He resigned his
post. It was in the middle of a hot summer. He wandered up and down
the streets without object and without hope. Lost in thoughts, he
contemplated the houses and their signboards as though he expected to
find there the answer to the riddle of his life. His gaze was arrested
by a large horseshoe which hung on a pole; memories of a nag and a
highway began to stir in his brain. Then he heard the blows of a
hammer in the courtyard. He entered in and saw a giant who was forging
horseshoes. The work proceeded slowly and the giant panted and sweated
at each blow.

It brightened Sten up to see the sparks dancing round the anvil, and
the forge also diffused a cheerful glow. But the smith did not seem in
a cheerful mood, for he broke off his work, sat down on a log of wood,
and watched with gloomy looks the iron growing cold. Then as though
stung by an evil conscience he went into the smithy and came out again
with a piece of red-hot iron, but seemed to be still more depressed,
for he laid the iron on the anvil, and then sat down and watched it
as though he expected it to turn into horseshoes. Presently he turned
round, and Sten, seeing his face, recognised Claus. He went up to him
and greeted him as an old acquaintance. Claus at first regarded him
with astonishment, and after he had been obliged to recognise him,
maintained an air of severe coldness. Suddenly his face brightened, as
though a thought had struck him.

"Listen!" he said. "Are you free at present?"

Sten replied that he certainly was.

"By Saint Anschar, you shall become a smith! Now I see that you were
really born to be one. Strange what mistakes one may make sometimes!
You have developed a pair of fists since we last met, and one soon
learns how to grasp a hammer!"

"It is certainly too hard for me, since I did not begin it when I was
young," objected Sten.

"Hard? What the dickens! It is not harder than anything else--I mean
for one who has the capacity. Listen! We will be good friends and have
a fine time. The master sits the whole day in the beer-shop, and only
you and I will be here."

Sten thought the proposal as good as any he was likely to meet with,
and believed he would find a support in Claus. Accordingly he consented.

"Then we will go at once to the master of the guild of smiths at the
journeymen's inn," said Claus.

Sten reminded him that he had said he occupied this office of master,
but Claus replied he had given it up owing to having too much to do.
They went therefore to the master, whose reception of Claus was so
obviously disdainful that Sten on the spot lost a considerable amount
of the respect he had felt for him. Meanwhile he was enrolled as an
apprentice of the guild, and this new dignity of his was sealed by
their drinking a number of mugs of beer in a public-house, and in the
evening was ratified by Claus's master, who was the worse for drink.
Sten slept that night at the smithy.

The next morning, while the matin-bell was ringing in the Ave Maria
Convent, Sten was aroused by being violently shaken by Claus, who said:
"Light the fire in the forge and tell me when it burns. I am going to
doze a little longer."

Sten blew the fire and worked the bellows for half an hour. When at
last it burnt up brightly, he woke Claus.

"Now put the iron in, and tell me when it gets red, I want still to
have a wink or two," said Claus, turning to the wall.

When the iron was glowing as red as blood, Sten woke him again.

"Now hammer out the iron till it is as slender as a finger, while I
shake off my sleepiness," said Claus, yawning.

Sten went back to the smithy, but now the iron had become black. He
worked the bellows and made it red again. Then he took it up with the
tongs and carried it out to the anvil, but before he had seized the
sledge-hammer, it was once more black. This process was repeated till
Sten became tired. Then he returned to Claus, who was snoring loud, and
had drawn his leather apron over his head in order not to be disturbed
by the daylight.

Claus became impatient. "Well, you stupid, can't you take the hammer in
one hand and the tongs in the other?"

Sten replied he could not.

"Then you can go for a jug of beer."

Sten felt ashamed of going into the street with a tin can, but as Claus
began to search in a tool-chest for a hammer, he hurried out.

The morning was fine; the sun shone on the gable-roofs of the houses,
and women and girls were proceeding to market. When Sten came out of
the public-house with the beer, and was about to cross the street, he
suddenly stopped, as though riveted, before someone who gazed at him
in astonishment and sorrow. He wished to turn round, but the crowd
prevented him; he wanted to raise his cap, but the beer-jug required
both his black hands to hold it.

The girl went on her way, and Sten hastened, weeping, back to the
smithy.

"What are you whimpering for?" said Claus, who had shaken off his sleep
and come out into the sunshine, where he drank his morning draught.

Sten did not answer. Claus took out a plank which he laid on the wooden
log against the wall of the house so that he had a support for his
back.

"Now we will work," he said, crossing his arms and making himself as
comfortable as possible. "You will begin with the cold iron first, so
that you learn how to handle the hammer."

Sten lifted the hammer, which was very heavy for him. He struck on the
anvil while Claus counted "One and two! and one and two! and one and
two!"

"Yes, yes; now you see what a workman has to do. One and two! and one
and two! and---- That is something different from lying on eider-down
and eating roast-veal! And two and---- You think one gets accustomed
to have the sun on one's neck, the forge in one's face, and the smoke
in one's nose? No, look you, one never does. And what do you think a
pretty girl says when a smith comes with his black hands and wants to
put his arm round her waist? 'Let me alone, lout!' she says. A smith
can certainly marry when he has saved some money, but he must take
an ugly girl whom no one else will have. And two! and one!---- Are
you listening? Do you remember when you sat in the inn and ate fowl
with sage stuffing, and, I had a salted herring in my bag? And he had
a horse, the young devil, and a velvet jacket. Where is the horse
now? Perhaps he is standing in the stable in the Knacker's House, or
whatever your father's castle was called. Do you remember that I made
you believe that Sir Vulcan was councillor to the Emperor of Rome. Ha!
ha! No, a smith is a smith, that is all."

Sten was growing tired.

"Are you lazy, you devil?" said Claus.

"Stop calling me devil," said Sten, "I am not accustomed to it."

"Perhaps his Grace is used to being called 'angel'?" said Claus
scornfully.

Sten _had_ been once used to it, but he refrained from saying so. He
went on with his hammer strokes.

"One and two! and one and two! and one---- No," said Claus, "you can
do that now. Beat out the iron rod now; it is harder to do when it is
cold, but still it can be done. I must go now to some business in the
town, and when the old man comes, tell him that I met my brother-in-law
from the country. But if you have not beaten out the iron rod by the
time I come back, I will weld your hind legs together, so that you will
be like a herring."

Sten felt quite exhausted and declared that he could not finish the
work alone. He also said openly that he had not come here to do
Claus's work while the latter sat in the ale-house.

Claus became furious. "Yes, you have, my young man," he shouted. "That
is just what you have come for. Look you! I have worked for thirty-five
years, and you have done nothing; now I am the nobleman and let you
work for me! Is it not so with the aristocracy?" Claus leant himself
against the plank with his arms folded and continued: "Yes, I am a
devilish fine nobleman, you can believe me! And you will see how I
shall flourish. I shall not be rich, but I shall be fat. You look
disapproving. You don't agree with my plan, nor understand it. The
upper class have invented it themselves, and a very excellent one it
is."

Sten replied that in his opinion Claus was a bumpkin.

"Go and fetch the big hammer. You will do some extra work by way of
punishment," Claus replied haughtily.

Sten's blood boiled over and he raised the iron rod against Claus.
At the same moment he felt something give way in his body, and fell
senseless to the ground.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Sten awoke to consciousness he was lying in a bed at the hospital,
and was condemned to inaction for several months, for he had broken a
blood-vessel, and his recovery was doubtful. In the large ward one bed
stood close to another, and as soon as it was empty there was always
someone waiting to occupy it. Here he saw every day instances how
those who did physical labour were exposed to accidents which other
classes escaped. At one time it was a carpenter who had cut his foot;
at another a mason who had fallen from a scaffolding. One day came
a breweress who had scalded herself when boiling wort; on another a
pewterer who had burnt his knee at the smelting oven.

Hitherto he had had no idea how widely spread human sufferings were,
and when he contrasted his past with his present, he began to guess how
the legend of the rich man, who could not enter heaven, had arisen.
Thus he lay the whole summer, without fresh air or seeing anything
green. He felt bitterly how the best time of the year was passing,
and imagined how it looked in the country, and what people were doing
every day. Numbers of monks came to the ward, and almost every day the
crucifix was lifted by some bed-side to comfort a sufferer.

Sten often talked with the monks and he could not help sharing their
view that the earth was a vale of tears. When his pains became severe
he felt relief in contemplating the Crucified Who writhed on the cross,
and he understood now why the Christian creed had been able to gain so
many disciples. One day, when he was especially suffering, he had a
visit from Claus, who had heard a report that Sten was dying. He felt
now compelled to see and speak with the sick man, and, if possible, to
comfort him; but in order to strengthen himself he went first into an
ale-shop, with the result that he reached the hospital in a somewhat
hilarious condition.

When he again met Sten, whose face had recovered its fair complexion
and his hands their delicacy, his former respect for him awoke, and
he confessed to himself that there were a finer and a coarser kind of
men. He called Sten "sir," and advised him to think about his soul
and to repent of his sins; he should not, he said, be sorry that he
had to die, for the smiths' company would carry him to the grave, and
afterwards hold such a funeral feast as had never been seen in the
city. Then he threw out some delicate hints that it was a pity for the
hospital to get Sten's clothes when he was dead, and at the same time
expressed his admiration of the excellent wool of which Sten's coat was
made; for the rest, he believed that old trousers could be altered,
and told Sten above all things to take care that nothing was left in
the pockets. Life, he said, was very troublesome, and parents who did
not teach their children to work with their hands were worse than
murderers, and to give children an education was to spoil them. Sten
would have made a good smith, if he had learnt to wield the hammer from
his childhood, and he might by this time have married the maiden from
the weighing-house. As it was, she had engaged herself to one of the
yeomen of the guard. Sten, however, should not be sad about that, for
he had not much longer to live, but Claus would carry the flag at his
funeral procession as a token that he had forgiven the young gentleman
all the wrong he had done him. As he uttered these last words, Claus
was so overcome by his noble sentiments that he wept as only a drunken
man can.

But Claus never carried the flag, because he was not the guild's
flag-bearer, and because Sten recovered. One fine autumn day he was
dismissed from the hospital and told that he was no longer ill, but
that he would never be strong enough to work. Now he realised the whole
terrible truth of what Claus had said: his education had robbed him of
the means of earning a livelihood. It was in vain that he went about
and sought a place in an already organised society; there was no place
for drones in this hive. The only thing remaining was to flee from this
hive and seek another where the working-bees supported the drones.
He thought of the convents where men did not work but lived very
comfortably and could devote their leisure to such refined enjoyments
as arts and sciences, and he wondered that he had not before this
enlisted in the armies of the Church.

With a light step he walked down to the convent of the Dominican monks
in the Osterlang-gata, and rang the bell. The little window in the gate
was opened and a monk asked Sten his name and address. He gave his name
and asked to speak to the prior with a view to entering the convent.
The gate was opened and Sten was admitted into the garden, where he was
told to wait.

Meanwhile the prior sat in the hall of the chapter going through the
estate and rent books with the steward. Various deficits in these
showed a serious diminution in the income of the convent. They were
just consulting how this might be increased to its highest possible
point again, as the General Chapter of the Dominican Order was
constantly demanding support for the war against the heretics, when
the gate-keeper's assistant announced Sten Ulffot's arrival, name, and
business.

"Ulffot of Wäringe, Hofsta and Löfsala," the prior said to himself, and
made the sign of the cross. "He comes as opportunely as though he were
sent by St Dominic himself. I know Löfsala thoroughly; it is a splendid
estate--twelve hundred acres of open ground, besides saleable meadows
and woods, water-mills, saw-mills and a splendid eel-fishery. Let him
in! Let him in by all means! Bid the gentleman welcome in the name of
the Lord."

"Your Reverence," interposed the steward, "wait a minute. Löfsala is a
fine estate certainly, but sad to say the present owner has no taste
for the spiritual life."

"The present owner?"

"Yes, the Ulffot family," continued the steward, "has been obliged
to give up everything, and the last member of it is said to be an
adventurer who has tried a little of everything but carried nothing
out, and is quite come down in the world."

"What do you say? What do you say? H'm! Well, what shall we do with
him?"

"From him we shall get neither profit nor honour," said the steward.
"We have monks enough who eat our provisions, and this is not a
poorhouse."

"Quite right!" said the prior. "Quite right! But who is to tell him
that? One of St Dominic's wisest and best rules is, never to send
anyone unsatisfied away. Will Brother Francis go into the garden and
speak a little with the young man? Speak a little with him, explain it
to him, you understand! Let us go on with our work, steward."

Brother Francis was a tall man, of alarming appearance, with a bearish
temper, who was employed to scare away such applicants as were not
"edible," in the phraseology of the industrious brotherhood; for the
Dominican Order was a powerful political corporation, which lived in
perpetual strife with princes, for power and property, and was by no
means an institution for exercising benevolence.

When Brother Francis saw Sten's insignificant appearance he thought he
could make short work with him. "What do you want in the convent?" he
asked without any preliminary remarks.

"I seek for the peace which the world cannot give," answered Sten.

"Then you have come to the wrong place," said Francis. "This is the
armoury of the Church Militant, and there is never peace here."

"Peace follows fighting," Sten ventured to object; but this irritated
the monk, who wished to get done with a thankless task.

"Say what you want and speak the truth--something like this: 'I cannot
dig and to beg I am ashamed; therefore I will come here and eat.' If
you say that, you will not be lying."

Sten felt that the monk had to a certain extent hit the mark, and
answered simply, "Alas, you are right!"

Surprised at this unexpected admission, and touched by Sten's
childlikeness, the monk took him farther into the garden and continued
his talk. "I know your history and understand the riddle of your
life. When Nature is left to herself, she produces masterpieces; but
when man interferes with her work, he makes a bungle of it. Look at
this pear tree; it is a descendant from a pear tree at Santa Lucia in
Spain, where it was cultivated for five hundred years. You think it
is an excellent thing that it can bring forth fine fruits to please
our palates? Nature does not think so, for she has produced the fruit
for the sake of the pipe which continue the species. Look at this pear
when I cat it in two! Do you see any pips? No! Over-cultivation has
done away with them. Look at this apple which glows so magnificently
with red and gold! It is an English pearmain. It has pips, but if I sow
them they produce crab-apples. When, however, a severe winter comes,
the pearmain trees are killed by frost, but the crab-apple trees are
not. Therefore one ought to give up over-cultivating people, especially
when it is done at the expense of others. Such cultivation is unsuited
to our country and our severe climate. Have I expressed myself
clearly? I am sorry for you, young man, but I cannot help you. _Beati
possidentes_--blessed are those who have succeeded. Your ancestors won
success, but they had not the skill to maintain it!"

He went on to talk of indifferent matters while he conducted Sten to
the gate. "There will be an early winter this year, if we may judge
by the ash-berries." Then he opened the gate, bowed politely and said
"Good-bye, sir."

When the gate closed, Sten felt that he was shut out from society
once for all, and he rallied the small remainder of bodily and mental
strength which he possessed, to form a resolution. But his will and
thinking power bed collapsed. The twilight had fallen. He followed the
descent of the steep street which led to the sea, as though he were
obeying the law of gravitation. His feet led him into a narrow alley
which was quite dark and filled with an overpowering stench from the
offal which had been thrown away there; but he went on and on, guided
by a faint light which appeared at the bottom of the alley. Presently
he stood before a water-gate which had been left ajar and through which
a moonbeam pierced the darkness. He opened the gate and before him lay
the surface of the water lit by the moon which was rising over the
island of Sikla. The little waves danced and played in the path of the
moonlight and the sea breeze blew freshly shore-wards.

Sten stepped over the narrow threshold and let the gate close behind
him, without exactly thinking what he was doing. At the same moment
all the bells in the city began to ring for vespers, and the drummers
on the city walls beat the tattoo as a signal for the citizens to go
to bed. Sten took off his cap, fell on his knees, and said a prayer.
Then he stood up, turned his back towards the sea, folded his arms over
his breast, looked up at the stars and let himself fall backwards, as
though he were going to rest. The silvery water mirror opened like
a dark grave, which closed again at once, and a great ring, like a
halo, appeared on the surface; it widened into many more circles, which
dispersed and died away. Soon the little waves reappeared and danced
and played in the moonlight as though they had never been frightened.




"UNWELCOME"


The baptism service was over, and the family party had got into the
boats and hoisted sail. The little fleet now glided out of the green
bay below the island chapel. In the first boat sat the god-parents with
the newly baptised infant.

"It was a strange idea to call the boy 'Christian,'" said the mother's
sister to the father's sister, as she put the child's feeding-bottle to
its mouth.

"Oh, it doesn't matter what one is called, and if he has the same name
as the Danish King it is good enough," said the other.

"Yes, but the poor boy will have no name-day if he has no patron saint."

"That is all right, for then no one will have the trouble of
celebrating it. He was not wished for and he was hardly welcome," said
the father's sister.

In the second boat sat the father and mother and the two elder
children, a boy and a girl aged seven and eight respectively.

"We could have done very well without another one," said the father as
he ported the helm.

"It is all very well talking now," said his wife as she counter-braced
the sail.

"Yes, I know," he replied.

"But you will be kind to him?" she said.

"I must be, I suppose," was his answer. He pushed his boy down from the
boat-side on which he had clambered, saying, "Keep still in the boat,
children, or the devil will have you."

In the third boat sat the pastor and the grand-parents.

"How is the fishing?" asked the former.

"So-so," answered the grandfather. "The Lord knows where the fish go
now. When I was young, one caught enough herrings in two nights to last
the winter, and now it is doubtful whether one catches any at all."

"Yes, it is strange; I had three standing nets out there on Wednesday
night and did not catch a fin," said the pastor. "Winter will bring
hard times, and one ought to look forward before producing more mouths
than one can fill."

"I told him so," said the grandfather assentingly. "The house is
big enough for one brood, not for two. Better one farmer than two
cottagers. I don't think, however, he will divide the farm, but this
last child must go out into service like others."

"That is certainly as good as starving at home," said the pastor.

The July sun blazed hotly upon the fjord, the sky was perfectly blue,
and the newly baptised child screamed, whether from joy or grief it
was difficult to say. Soon the thatched roofs of the farm were visible
among the alders, and the boats halted at the bridge. The occupants
disembarked and were regaled with a good meal spread under the oak
trees. Afterwards the pastor thanked God for the happiness with which
he had blessed the house, and bade the guests raise their glasses to
welcome the new citizen of the world into the congregation.

       *       *       *       *       *

Christian grew up among the calves and pigs, for his brother and sister
were too old to play with him. He seemed born with two characteristics
which never left him: one was to be always in the way, the other was to
be never welcome. Wherever he appeared, behind a bush, on a haystack,
under a boat, in a loft, or in the cottage, the cry always was, "Is
it you, young scoundrel?" Wherever he happened to be, and anyone
approached, they said, "You always have to be in the way."

His parents, who for eight years had been unaccustomed to the crying
of a baby, and were now a good deal older so that they enjoyed a
good sleep, found it somewhat difficult to reconcile themselves to
his crying at night, and they soon came to regard it as a failing
which was peculiar to their youngest born. It was in vain that the
grandmother asserted that all children cried, and that Hans the eldest
had really cried much more when he was little. His father said he could
not remember that at all; all he remembered was that Hans had been
an uncommonly good child, who had always been a source of joy to his
parents. There was such a great difference, he added, between children.

Meanwhile Christian, who was intelligent enough to see that he was in
the way, acquired the habit of keeping out of the way; when he saw
anyone he hid himself, ran out to the woods and fields, and was up to
all kinds of mischief.

As he became older and was strong enough to do some useful work,
attempts were made to tame him, but in vain. When put in charge of
cattle, he ran away from them and let them go into the fields; he laid
the fishing-nets so deep that they could not be got up again, and when
sought for, he was not to be found. In short he seemed half a savage.
Once, at his elder brother's suggestion, he was beaten, but then he
remained away eight whole days, and when he reappeared he was as stout
and strong as before; no one knew what he had eaten or where he had
slept.

But Christian himself knew well enough. The scanty diet of his home
consisted chiefly of salt fish, turnips and bread. Christian, who often
had to satisfy himself with what fell from the table, or was left
over, often felt a longing for more nourishing food, especially as he
grew older and approached manhood. He was hungry the whole day, and
went to the wood and the seashore to get food. Fish did not attract
him, for he had chewed them till he was tired and they gave him no
strength; he looked for warm-blooded creatures, and when he caught
some young birds he ate them raw. Then he felt stronger as the blood
diffused an intoxicating warmth throughout his body. Eggs had the same
effect; these he took ruthlessly from the nests of the sea-birds on the
shore. In this way he procured for himself a diet which was much more
nourishing than his parents and brother and sister could contrive to
obtain.

So he grew, and became strong, but could not make up his mind to work.
In a rude boat which he had managed to construct himself, he cruised
about the islands and hunted for eggs. His parents, who did not exactly
miss his presence, soon began to regard him as having flown from the
nest.

One fine spring day, when the eider-geese were flying over the
outermost islands, Christian sailed out with his bow and his nooses,
more for the sake of amusement and passing the time than for
practical purposes, for he never killed anything except for immediate
consumption. He landed with his boat on one of those skerries which
form the last breakwater against the open sea, and which only sea-birds
and fishermen frequent during the summer. The skerry was uninhabited,
but a rude shed had been built on it to serve as a sleeping-place for
fishermen in the fishing season, and as a shelter for travellers and
those who might be driven ashore. It consisted of a single room with
the bare earth for its floor; along the wall were arranged berths like
shelves furnished with sheep-skins for sleeping under. Two stones on
the ground marked where a fire might be lit, and flint and steel were
kept in a place well known to all between the beams above the door.
The door was always closed but could be opened with a bent wooden
peg. Everyone had a right to enter if they only closed the door after
them and put back the flint and steel in its place. If any-body wished
to show benevolence or gratitude, they placed an armful of grass or
juniper twigs near the fire-place, for there was not a tree on the
skerry. It was in these shelters that Christian generally slept, and
there he took his simple meals; he knew each one of them for miles
around, and where the best sheep-skins were to be found. The fleas
which infested them generally left him alone.

Meanwhile the spring evening was beautiful, and the sea lay there
serene in blue tranquillity. Christian, who had learnt not to trust it,
drew his boat up and hid it behind some great stones. He had rowed far
and clambered about on the rocks, so that he went into the rest-house
and got into the topmost berth to sleep. He lay there for a time and
thought about various things--about the day which had just passed,
about his life and its purposes, and the life which should follow this.
He had opened the sky-light and saw the steel-grey heaven above him,
and a star or two which palely glimmered in the lingering sunlight. Has
religious instincts had not been educated either by parents, pastors
or teachers, nor had he been confirmed, but he knew that behind
nature and the events of life were guiding powers of which one had no
nearer knowledge. He had arrived at no certainty regarding the object
of his existence. Together with the gift of life, he had received the
instinct to preserve it, and obeyed this instinct. What more was there
to do? He ate in order to be able to work, and worked in order to get
something to eat. Yes, but in the intervals, he thought, or, rather,
he wondered. He wondered whether perhaps these very thoughts of his
constituted the higher aim of life of which he dreamt; he remembered
that his mother had said that the earth was a vale of tears through
which we must wander in order to become better and thereby worthier
of the Kingdom of Heaven. He found, on closer reflection, that he
neither grew better nor worse from one day to another, and he did
not understand how he was to improve. Perhaps he was an exception?
Possibly. All others took the oath of loyalty to the King; all others
paid taxes, went to church, paid tithes to the clergy, paid rent, swept
the snow away for one another, bought and sold, summoned each other
before the law-courts, but could do nothing without asking permission
and payment. They asked permission to be able to marry, to be received
into the community where they were born, to be buried in the earth; and
on each occasion there were fees to pay. They paid the King for ruling
them, they paid the judge for judging them, the pastor for saving them,
and the executioner for hanging them; they paid in the town for the
right to sell their fish, and they paid for the bridges on which the
town's existence depended. Christian, who did nothing of all this, was
therefore an exception, and the reason he escaped all these payments
was, that he possessed nothing. That was the difference between him and
them: he possessed nothing. In earlier times he had heard those who had
nothing sailed out on the sea and took from those who had. This was
now not permitted, and rightly so, for Christian could not think it
permissible that anyone should come and take his boat or his axe from
him.

While these half-developed thoughts came and went in the
half-consciousness of a tired brain, sleep overcame him. After some
hours he awoke with a choking feeling in his chest and a terrible
smarting in his eyes. He sat up in his berth and saw that a fire
had been made on the ground below. By it sat two men--one in the
half-barbaric costume of the inhabitants of Dägo, the other in the
everyday garb of a Swedish fisherman. They were roasting some herrings
before the fire. Christian, who did not feel inclined to move, as he
did not know how the strangers might be disposed, protected himself
from the smoke as well as he could by creeping as far as possible
under the coverlet; he did not blame himself for listening to their
conversation, but, as we shall see afterwards, turned it to profit.

"They are a stupid lot, these Swedes!" said the man from Dägo, who
believed that his superior bodily strength gave him the right to say
what he liked.

"Oh, you mustn't talk ill of the Swedes," said the other, who in such a
nocturnal _tête-à-tête_ did not venture to use a more impolite form of
speech.

"Well, can one imagine less enterprising people than these fishermen?
If they knew what the eider-birds' down was worth in Russia, they would
be able to make a pile of money."

"Yes, but you see the Swedes think it wrong to deprive the birds of the
down which they need for hatching their eggs."

"That is just their stupidity; for if they don't take it, foreigners
will, like they take everything else."

"No, it is not stupidity, it is consideration to think of our
successors, who also should derive profit from the birds which would
disappear, if disturbed."

"That is not true; but if foreigners came, they would take both eggs
and down together."

"They can do that if they have no conscience; Swedes would rather be
poor than behave so badly."

"That is why I call them stupid. But now, to speak of another matter.
Why don't you hunt ermines and squirrels here as they do inland?"

"Because we have enough to do with the fish and prefer the certain to
the uncertain."

"That is right; but I should prefer a sure income from skins and down
to an insecure one from the sea. If I had nothing else to do, it
wouldn't be long before I had enough money to buy a piece of ground to
build upon and fish too."

The Swede dropped the subject and shared his food with the stranger,
who had anchored before the skerry because the wind had fallen. When it
rose again at sunrise they both left the rest-house, little guessing
what seeds they had sown in Christian's uncultured brain.

No sooner had the sound of their footsteps died away than he sprang up
and went out. The rifling sun illumined the open sea which was ruffled
by the morning breeze, and over whose surface sea-birds were circling.
To Christian this scene was not new, but to-day the sun seemed to shine
more brightly and his horizon was enlarged. His eye, which had often
swept the surface of the water without finding an object behind the
blue line which bound the horizon, fancied it perceived, hidden by the
clouds in the east, a distant land where the deliverer dwelt who would
come and make him like other men; he would cease to be in the way; he
would be welcome somewhere, would rest upon his own roof, and perhaps
possess a small spot on this earth where he hitherto was hunted about
like a trespassing dog. Hope awoke in his soul, and when he saw the
strange boat hoist sail and enter the golden path traced on the waves
by the sun, he fancied himself standing by the helm and steering to the
distant land behind the blue horizon with his precious cargo, and now
he determined to begin a new life.

       *       *       *       *       *

Far out in the Fjallang Fjord, almost in the open sea, lies a skerry
which is called Trollhattorna or the "Goblin's Cap." It consists of a
round crag with four flat sides which have a certain resemblance to
the cape which the goblins of fairy-tales are supposed to wear. Between
these faces of the crag are deep clefts where guillemots build their
nests, and where they are completely protected from rain and wind.
After sundry combats with the fearless owners Christian had succeeded
in obtaining undisturbed possession of that cleft which faced the land,
into which the wind from the sea never blew. Here he had contrived
a storehouse for his collected treasures by stretching a rain-proof
sealskin, which he occasionally smeared with train-oil, between the
walls of the cleft. He spent two years in amassing these treasures,
and employed in doing so all his long-trained capacities. He could
imitate all creatures' voices; he could whistle like the weasel, make
a smacking noise like the squirrel, and grumble like the eider-duck.
He knew how to approach one of the latter when sitting on her nest of
seaweed on the open beach, and he could look at her so that she quietly
let him stroke her back while he plucked the down. He never took more
than one of the six eggs, and if the nestlings were already hatched
he left them in peace; the ermine he sometimes caught with traps and
sometimes shot them with blunted arrows so that the fur should not be
injured. Squirrels he watched for from behind an oak, and could entice
them to come so near that he could seize them with his hands; in the
winter he dragged them by the help of a willow branch from their nests,
and obtained their entire store of hazel-nuts besides.

His senses had grown so fine by practice that he could hear a mile
off what sort of bird was approaching, and even in the twilight he
could distinguish at an incredible distance between a black water-hen
and a merganser. Among his worst rivals, the crows, who hunted the
eider-ducks in order to devour their eggs, he did great execution. By
exposing the bodies of weasels and squirrels which he had skinned, he
allured whole swarms of these uninvited plunderers, which he then shot
down. Such was his skill and so completely undisturbed was he, that
within two years he had accumulated in his grotto a store which seemed
to him sufficient to bring him to the foreign land where the sun rose,
and where people would know how to appreciate his treasures. Now again
the spring was approaching, and the thought how he should construct a
vessel sufficiently large and sea-worthy began to disquiet him.

He knew that he could get out to the open sea very easily with a large
fishing-boat such as was used for catching herrings, and that it was
not more than two days' journey to the land on the other side, but he
saw small prospect of being able to build such a boat and of procuring
the expensive sails. His natural instinct, which revolted against the
idea of anyone coming and taking from him what he had earned by his own
work, forbade his procuring such a boat in any unlawful way.

The spring came nearer and nearer, and his disquietude increased.
One afternoon he was sitting on the highest point of Trollhattorna,
looking out over the sea where sails appeared and disappeared. A
red-brown eider-duck came swimming with its young ones after it; the
sea-gulls flew past his ears screaming, and the mergansers answered
them. Christian felt like a mountain king as he sat there above his
treasure-chamber, but at the same time he seemed to himself to have
been bewitched by the mountain spirits, for he saw no prospect of
getting away. Just then he heard the measured stroke of oars behind
him, and saw a boat with four men in it being rowed towards the place
where he sat. As it came nearer, he recognised his father and brother,
but did not know the two others, one of whom shouted to him: "Come
down, you pirate!"

Christian remained where he was.

"Obey, when the King's sheriff orders you," said his father.

High up on the skerry stood a pile of stones which the fishermen had
set there as a mark. Christian was prepared to defend himself. "I am
not a pirate," he said.

"Ah, do you contradict the King's sheriff," said his father. "Beware!
and do not make us all miserable."

"I make no one miserable," answered Christian, "but I defend myself
when I see that people wish me ill. What do you want from me?"

"You have here a hiding-place for goods which you have stolen from
peaceful traders," said the sheriff. "We have seen all."

"I have stolen nothing from anyone," said Christian. "All that is here
I have earned by hard work."

"Nonsense! Do you think we shall believe that one can collect so many
skins and all this down here in these bare skerries. Come down, for the
last time, or we will take you."

They began to climb the cliff, but then Christian began to hurl down
blocks of stone, which bounded over the heads of his assailants,
knocked splinters out of the rocks, and plumped into the water,
without however striking anyone.

"Wretched boy!" cried his father. "You were born for my ruin!"

"Who begot me?" answered Christian, and threw the last stone.

Now the besiegers had a prospect of success, and soon Christian felt
his legs caught in a noose; and he was soon wound up like a ball,
rolled down the hill, and laid in the bottom of the boat.

"Do not hurt him unnecessarily," said his father. "I will be security
for him."

Then he began in a comparatively friendly tone to tell Christian how
badly he had treated his parents, who had produced him, clothed him,
and been kind to him; with what sorrow and shame he had requited them
since their name would now become notorious and dishonoured in the
neighbourhood. He adjured him by the Cross of Christ and all the saints
that he should confess his sin, since by his doing so the offence would
be half pardoned and might be atoned for by a fine. He pointed to his
grey hairs and begged Christian not to bring dishonour on them; he bade
him to think of his brother who would soon take his father's place
and uphold the good name and prosperity of the family; he concluded
by declaring that one must not live for oneself but for others also,
because society was built up of families, and if families did not hold
together, society would fall. Christian should therefore acknowledge
his crime.

But Christian had committed no crime, and therefore could not save
society. His father's unwonted mildness moved him and he wished for a
moment that he had done what he was accused of.

Their talk continued till they reached home. Christian was taken to the
barn and locked up there. The others went to the cottage, where they
ate their supper and talked over the matter. Presently, as Christian
lay reflecting on the floor of the barn, the door opened, and his
mother stepped in.

"Son," she said, "think of your old mother, and tell the truth."

"Then mother would rather have a thief for her son than an honourable
boy?"

"I want you to confess; then your father will pay a fine for your
offence, and our good name will be saved."

"That is strange," said Christian, whose brain could not follow this
line of thought. "If I make myself a criminal, then the crime can be
pardoned, but if I continue to be honourable, it cannot. What crime?
One which has never been committed? For I have not stolen; I have only
gone where anyone can go, and for a long time have collected skins and
eggs as I have leave to do."

But his mother replied that that had nothing to do with it; the one
thing necessary was that he should confess, since; the King's sheriff
desired it.

His mother departed sadly. Then came his sister, and said that
Christian should not plunge her too into misery; for if the family were
disgraced, her fiancé, Peter, could not marry her. Christian had only
to confess, then he would be free and his father would pay the fine.

Christian replied that he could not say "yes" when he ought to say "no."

But why, she rejoined, could he not when he would make so many people
happy?

Oh, did his sister then wish him to lie?

Why should he not under the circumstances?

He would despise himself and not wish to live any longer.

Yes, but if he made his father and mother and brother and sister happy?
Did not Christian want them to be happy?

Yes he did, but lying was another matter.

All men did that a little, and Christian should not make himself better
than others.

All men liars! Christian had never believed that, and he himself had
never lied.

That was because he had never needed to lie.

Why, that was dreadful! How could men live together if they did not
speak the truth?

His sister said she could not explain that, but now she would go her
way, and never wished to see again a brother who made her so unhappy.

Christian felt quite nervous by having so much attention concentrated
on his person; he was not accustomed to people busying themselves about
him, and this close dealing with his soul had disturbed his wonted
equanimity. These people begged and implored him to do them a service;
he could make them happy or miserable with a word--he was therefore a
person of importance. This made him self-conscious, and he was seized
with a desire to see the result of his intervention on their behalf.
It was merely a matter of saying "yes" instead of "no," and after all
what did it signify when all men were accustomed to change little words
in case of need. Perhaps he would have fared better if he had done so
before. His resolve was taken.

His father then entered and asked him if it was possible for a boy to
collect such a stock of things?

Yes it was, if one did nothing else and was diligent.

His father could not believe it; he had never seen it and therefore
found it incredible.

Christian repeated his affirmation. His father asked him to confess
that he had stolen. Christian said "yes." His father, with the knife
in his hand, asked whether he would confess to the bailiff. Christian
promised solemnly to do so. His father cut the rope and they went
together to the cottage. There sat the bailiff eating his porridge
peacefully.

"Has he confessed?" he asked, letting his spoon rest.

"He has," said the father, to the great joy of those of the family who
were present.

But the bailiff seemed to have made some miscalculation, for he was not
glad.

"Well," he resumed, turning to Christian, "how did you manage it? I
should like to know."

Christian, who would also have been pleased to hear how a single man
sets about plundering a trader's boat, stood at first speechless,
but as he began to think how he would act under the specified
circumstances, his imagination came to his help. He went to the stand
near the door, where the axes were kept, and took the largest gimlet
he could see. Then he took down his father's great sheep-skin, threw it
on the bed, and after he had taken his stand in the middle of the room,
began thus. "There lies the boat at anchor" (be pointed to the bed)
"and there lies the skipper asleep" (he indicated the sheep-skin).

"Wait! Let me think!" interrupted the bailiff, whose brain worked
slowly.

But Christian continued. "Here I stand on the shore, watching the boat.
Then I consider. There lies a boat and here am I. Probably there is
something at the bottom of the boat."

Christian, who was not accustomed to lie, came to a stop, for his
awakening conscience urged him to flight and freedom. Fortunately the
bailiff utilised this pause to get his ideas into order.

"Let me see," he said. "There lies the skipper, and there lies the
gimlet. What had you to do with the gimlet?"

Christian knew well, but that was, for the present, his secret. "I
throw myself into the sea, my legs are entangled in the weeds, I wrench
myself loose, swim to the anchor-rope, take the gimlet and sink the
boat."

"That is too fast, too fast! Wait! Where were we?" said the bailiff.
"We sank the boat."

He dipped the wooden spoon into the jug of milk, and continued.

"Well, and the cargo sank too?"

"Yes."

"That is remarkable. How did you get hold of it then?"

"I raised it," said Christian.

"He raised it. Quite right. Now I begin to see," said the bailiff,
turning to Christian's father. "But," he resumed, after rubbing his
nose with the spoon handle, "I do not understand why he sank the boat
when he took the cargo."

"The skipper! The skipper!" broke in Christian's father, who was quite
absorbed in the adventure.

"The skipper! Yes, that is quite right! He is a sharp youngster! It is
a serious case, but finely managed."

Christian had had time to make his plan. He drew back to the door and
asked, "Can I go now?"

The bailiff asked himself, "Can he go now?" Then he said, "Wait a
moment! Did you not take up the skipper too?"

"No, I did not," said Christian, "but if the bailiff wishes it I will."

Then he disappeared through the door, with the sheep-skin on his
shoulder and the gimlet in his hand, indicating his intention to
save the skipper, and leaving those present to their reflections and
discussions.

When Christian went out he went straight to the shore, reflecting how
quickly he had become a liar and how comfortably lying helped one
through the difficulties of life. Then he bored holes in all the boats
except the largest fishing-boat, on which he hoisted sail and steered
towards Trollhättor. There he put his stores on board till the sun
rose, then hoisted sail again and held on in the sun's track.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two years had passed. The old fisherman and his wife were dead. Their
son Hans had taken over the farm and married a poor girl. Nothing had
been heard of Christian, and at the division of the property he had
been declared disinherited because he had left the country on account
of a crime and nothing more had been heard of him. Hans' cottage stood
on the shore of the fjord, just where it narrowed to a sound through
which boats had to pass to reach the large fishing skerries. Exactly
opposite the sound lay a little island about one acre in extent. It
consisted mostly of hillocks, but in a hollow between them some earth
had collected, covered with very good grass, and a score of birches
had sprung up. Through his cottage windows Hans could see the island
which was part of a neighbour's property.

One day during the spring thaw he sat and watched how the crows sailed
on the pieces of ice in the sound; snow lay in patches on the banks,
but there were glimpses of green in the clefts of the rocks. By chance
he glanced over to the other shore and there perceived some movements
going on which aroused his curiosity. Some workmen were bringing stones
and timber already hewn and cut as if for building a cottage, but he
could see no vessel which had conveyed the materials or the workmen. He
could not rest till he had sent a servant over to his neighbour to ask
what was going on. The messenger returned with the news that a stranger
from Esthland had bought the island and was intending to build on it.
This was all that Hans could discover at present. But not long after
he discovered that the new-comer was his own brother, Christian, who
had returned, accompanied by his wife whom he had married abroad. On
mature consideration the risks for his freedom had not seemed great to
him since no witnesses to hid adventurous plundering could be produced,
and as regards the disappearance of the fishing-boat and the boring of
holes in the others, there would only be a fine to pay, if his brother
lodged a complaint against him.

Meanwhile the house grew higher and became such a stately building,
with its outhouses, as to attract the attention of all who passed by,
and to arouse the envy of Hans. One day he said to his wife, "I begin
to think that this old house must be rebuilt."

"It is not long since that was done," she answered.

But Hans was wilful and had his own way. He was obliged to hire workmen
who ate up his seed-corn and finished his winter stock of herrings.

"Pride comes before a fall," said people.

During the winter Hans sat in his large house and was half starved. In
spring he had to sell a cow in order to buy seed.

Christian, on the other hand, lived comfortably in his roomy dwelling,
though he possessed neither land, meadows, woods, fishing-grounds,
cattle, nor yacht. Hans and he never met.

One evening the pastor, on his way from visiting a sick person, called
in at Hans' house, and sat by the fire to warm himself. "I cannot
understand how he has his train-oil factory far away in Esthland, and
can sit here at home and manage it," said the pastor.

"Who?" asked Hans.

"He over there; Christian, your brother."

"Train-oil factory? He told my neighbour he was a rope-maker."

"Rope-maker? That is strange! Then one of us has heard wrong."

While they were discussing the matter, there was a knock at the door
and the bailiff entered. He had been engaged in his business out of
doors.

"It is quite incomprehensible," he said, "how one can sit here among
the skerries and manage mines far away in Russia."

General commotion! Christian was a scoundrel! The pastor must go over
and speak with him and the bailiff must find out how he supported
himself.

The next day the pastor and the bailiff paid Christian a visit. They
were received on the bridge and conducted into the house, which was
handsomely furnished like that of a rich man, so that all questions
as to Christian's means of subsistence were prevented. The floor was
covered with smooth hewn planks, the fire-place was made of stone,
and the walls were covered with hangings. Christian's wife was lively
and pretty; her hair was black and hung over her eyes. She went round
and poured Greek wine into their glasses while Christian related the
moat extraordinary adventures of his travels which the pastor and the
bailiff, under the influence of wine, found quite credible. This went
on till late at night, and the pastor was carried down to the boat on
a pair of oars, bestowing his blessing on tools and buildings and not
least on Christian who had presented the church with a goblet of gilt
silver. The bailiff, who had received a hunting-dog as a gift from
Christian, was guided by it down to the boat where, placing his fingers
on a tub of herrings, he took an oath that Christian was the most
honourable man in the skerries.

Some time afterwards Christian came home, after an excursion among the
skerries, in a great sailing boat rigged with two lateen sails which
could hold straight against the wind and needed not to be taken down
when he turned.

Hans now had no more peace. He must have lateen sails. His wife had
been weaving linen during the whole winter for new shirts; Hans soon
convinced her that the sails were more important. But he was also
convinced, after bearing of the great reception which his brother had
given to his guests, that a house-holder could not offer beer to his
guests when a small-tenant offered wine. Still, wine was very dear,
and he had a sharp struggle with himself as well as with his wife. He
said they could economise with milk, to which he attached no special
importance, and that he was quite willing to give up his own share of
it. The second cow was sold.

Meanwhile wonderful reports began to go about and were repeated.
Trollhättor was said to be haunted, and no one ventured to go there.
Flames had been seen dancing over the sea. About that time there was a
shipwreck, accompanied by the unusual circumstance that not one of the
crew was saved. It seemed still more peculiar that Christian, shortly
before the ship was driven on shore, had rented an inferior fishing
ground among the outermost skerries, which had shallow banks and where
no one wished to fish. He had been seen there carrying fishing-forks
and lighting fires, but no one could understand why he went so far out
with fishing-forks.

The reports increased and became threatening. But the pastor and the
bailiff, who were regular guests at Christian's, took him vigorously
under their protection, refuted the scandal, and thus the whole affair
was forgotten.

When the spring came Hans had no seed-corn. He took no trouble about
his patches of ground but let anything grow on them. He killed his own
oxen for a baptism-feast which he held in March. No resource was now
left to him but fishing. It was an insecure means of earning a living,
almost like gambling. When he got nothing, he went hungry; when he had
a good haul, he made a feast. His brother-in-law, who had a claim on
his farm on account of his wife, caused him uneasiness also.

When the week of prayer before Easter arrived and the pastor came with
the Holy Cross and the boys sang the litany round the fields in order
to bless the seed sown, Hans was ashamed to acknowledge that his field
had no seed sown in it. Then when only thistles appeared on it, people
said he had betrayed the Cross of Christ.

The next year Hans had another son. Then he burnt up his last wood and
sowed turnips in the ashes. But Christian sat on the shore exactly
opposite, and saw how the beautiful island was changed to a bare
skerry. He felt neither grief nor joy, but only found it instructive to
watch the development of the affair.

In autumn Hans' turnip-crop failed, for the wood which had been a
protection from the north wind was gone. One day, when their need was
great and Hans had gone out fishing, his wife took a punt and rowed
over the sound. Christian received her in a friendly way and bade her
come into the guest-house where private conversations were generally
held. She told him her great need and asked for help. Christian made
no objection but gave help generously, including a cow, seed-corn, and
so on. Hans' wife was moved, and confessed that her husband had not
behaved well. Christian said he knew nothing about that and did not mix
in other people's affairs. So they parted.

When she had gone, Christian said to his wife, "Olga, I have nothing
more to do here. I have seen the punishment come without lifting my
hand against my own flesh and blood. Hans is a beggar; in winter he
will become a thief, since he must steal wood, after having burnt his
trees. His children will become servants, if nothing worse. And that
is right! They taught me to lie, and the representative of the law
made me a thief. I was honest, but they would not let me be so. Now I
could be so if I wished, for they have told me I can be an honorary
magistrate, if I like to buy ground. But I will possess nothing of this
earth for which men fight; I will not be respected by this society,
who suspect that I am a scoundrel, and yet pardon me because I have a
stone fire-place and drink wine. All my toils put together could not
make me rich, you know, for one cannot become so by collecting skins
and down. If I had lived three hundred years ago I would have been a
pirate and my name would have been celebrated and cursed in the world.
Then I would have staked my life and won my bread in honourable battle;
now I am a wreck-plunderer and a corpse-robber, who enjoy the respect
of everyone except my own--and thine, Olga. Let us leave this country
which had no place for us when we were honest, but opened its doors
when we were dishonest. Let us go where the earth has yet no owner,
where the freeborn man can pasture his flocks, where the sky itself
waters the grass, and the sun entices it to grow. Your eyes, Olga, ask
me whether I shall not miss the old home where my childhood passed? I
had no childhood; no one bade me welcome when I came, and no one says
farewell when I go. When I saw you, Olga, my childhood began, and where
you are, there is my home."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the evening the Trollhättor was again haunted, and an incendiary set
fire to Christian's house. By the light of the fire his largest boat
was seen sailing out in an easterly direction. Christian sat at the
helm, but his young wife sat in front by the main-sheet, keeping the
look-out.




HIGHER AIMS


It was so cold in the little country church that the breath came like
smoke from the mouths of the priest and the boys who sang in the
choir. The congregation, who listened to the Mass standing, had been
allowed to spread straw on the ground so that whenever they knelt
at the ringing of the little bell, they should not be too chilled.
To-day there were many people at Mass, because they were expecting
an unaccustomed spectacle at the end of the service. The priest was
going to admonish an ill-assorted couple, who would not keep the peace
and could not divorce each other because no crime had been committed.
Neither of them wished to leave their children and incur the disgrace
of running away. The Mass was concluded and the litany, a "Miserere,"
sounded pathetically from the voices which trembled with cold. The
sun shone redly through the frosted window-panes, and the burning wax
candles gave no light at all, but looked merely like yellow blots over
which the warmed air quivered.

"Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata mundi," sang the priest; the boys
answered "Miserere!" and the congregation joined in--deep clear men's
voices and high soft women's voices--"Miserere--have mercy upon us!"

The last "Miserere" sounded like a cry of despair, for at the same
moment the married pair stepped from the hidden place by the door,
which had been appointed for them, and went up the central aisle to
the altar. The man was tall, powerfully built, with a brown beard, and
limped somewhat; the woman had a small, slender figure with pliant
outlines and graceful movements. Her face was half hidden by a hood, so
that one only saw a pair of pale blue eyes with a suffering expression,
and the upper part of her white cheeks.

The priest said a low prayer and turned to the congregation. He was
a young man, not yet thirty, whose fresh, good-natured face seemed
to be out of keeping with his long robe and the solemn, severe words
which he uttered. He had long ago received the confessions of each of
the married pair, and only delivered his admonition at the bishop's
command. The discordant couple had been to the bishop and had asked
him to dissolve their marriage, but the latter had found no reason to
grant their request since the canonical law and the Decretals only
permitted divorce on account of sin, barrenness in certain cases, and
the running away of husband or wife from hearth and home.

The priest began his admonishment in a dry, expressionless voice, as
though he did not believe what he said. He declared that marriage had
been established by God Himself, Who had created woman from the man's
rib to be a help to him; but since the man was created first and the
woman subsequently, the wife should be subject to the husband, and he
should be her lord.

(Here the little hood made a movement as though the wearer wished to
speak.)

The man on his side should treat his wife with respect because she was
his honour, and by doing so he honoured himself in his wife. This was
the teaching of St Paul in his Epistle to the Corinthians, chapter
seven, verse four, on which passage the decree of Gratian was founded,
declaring that the wife had not power over herself, but the husband.

(The little hooded figure shook from head to foot, and the man nodded
approvingly at the priest's words. The priest, who now fastened his
eyes on the woman, changed his tone.)

When the disciples came to Jesus and asked whether divorce was
permissible for married people, be answered and said: "What God hath
joined, let not man put asunder," and for this reason the Church did
not allow the dissolution of marriage. The concessions made by earthly
laws were only due to the wickedness of men and could not be approved
by the Church.

Life was not a rose-garden, and we must not demand too much from it.
The preacher himself was married (as at that time Catholic priests were
allowed to be), he knew therefore how to judge in the matter; he knew
that there must be give and take, if there was not to be quarrelling
and strife. He had married this young couple and witnessed their first
happiness; he had baptised their child and seen their love sanctified
by parental joy. He reminded them of those unforgettable hours when
life had given them its best and the future shone before them like a
bright summer day. He adjured them by that recollection to reach each
other their hands, and to forget all that had happened since the spirit
of unrest had entered their hearts; he prayed them in the presence
of that Christian congregation, to renew the tie which in their
selfishness they had sought to dissolve.

There followed a moment of deep silence and expectation, while the
congregation showed their impatience by pushing forward as far as the
way they were packed together allowed. But the married pair remained
motionless.

Then the priest seemed to become impatient, and in a voice trembling
with annoyance and anger he again resumed. He spoke of the duties of
parents towards their child, of God's wrath against an unforgiving
temper, and said plainly that marriage was not meant to be merely
a means of carnal indulgence or of increasing the population, but
also--and he laid emphasis on this--of family education. He gave them
till the following Sunday to think it over, and bade them depart in
peace.

No sooner had he spoken the last word and made a gesture of dismissal
with his hand, than the young wife turned and departed. Coldly and
calmly she passed between the rows of the congregation, and disappeared
through the great entrance. The man hesitated a moment, then he sought
the smaller door at the end of the transept.

As the priest walked home with his wife, who had been present at Mass,
she said to him in a gentle but reproachful tone: "Did you believe what
you said?"

"You are my conscience, dear woman, and you know my thoughts; spare me
therefore a little, for the spoken word smites like a scourge."

"Then let the scourge smite! You know by their confessions that the
union of this married pair is no true marriage, you know that this
woman is a martyr whose life can only be saved by her keeping away
from this man; you know this, and yet you exhort her to go towards her
destruction."

"The Church, you see, my friend, has higher aims than the well-being of
ordinary people."

"I thought that the well-being of men, what you call their salvation,
was the highest aim of the Church. What then is the Church's highest
aim?"

"The increase of God's kingdom on earth," answered the priest after
some reflection.

"Let us consider!" said his wife. "It is said that only the saved shall
dwell in God's Kingdom. Then the Church is to save men."

"In the higher sense, yes!"

"In the higher sense; are there then two?"

"A little foolish woman can ask more questions than seven wise men can
answer," said the priest, and pressed his wife's hand.

"Then it is a bad look-out for the wisdom of the wise, for what will
they answer when an intelligent person asks--when all the intelligent
people in the world come and ask?" continued the foolish little woman.

"They will answer that they do not know," whispered the priest.

"You ought to say that aloud, and should have said it to-day in the
church. Your conscience is not pleased with you to-day."

"Then I will silence my dear conscience," said the priest, and kissed
his wife, who was standing in the porch of their house.

"That you cannot," she answered, "as long as you love me; and certainly
not in that way."

They stamped the snow from their feet and entered the little parsonage,
where they were met by two small, healthy children, who wanted to kiss
their father and mother. Not the least cause of the heartiness of their
welcome was the good Sunday dinner which was cooking in the oven.

The priest took off his long clerical coat and put on one more like a
layman's. In this, however, he never showed himself to any member of
his congregation but only to his family and the old cook. The table
was laid, the floor was clean and white, and the cut fir twigs smelt
sweetly. The father said grace and they took their seats at the table
as glad and as much at peace with the world and with each other as
though a heart had never been broken for the sake of "higher aims."

       *       *       *       *       *

The snow had melted and the earth reeked and fermented with creative
power. The parsonage was situated on the unsightly plain in Uppland
which is included in the ecclesiastical district of Rasbo. Wherever the
eye looked there was only to be seen the stony ground, the clay soil,
and some elder bushes which cowered like frightened hares before the
never-ceasing wind. In the distance, on the horizon, were visible the
tree-tops of the edge of a wood like the masts of a ship disappearing
at sea. On the south side of the house the priest had planted some
trees and hoed a little patch of ground where he cultivated flowers and
vegetables, which in winter had to be covered with straw since they
were not accustomed to this severe climate. A small stream which came
from the woods in the north ran by the parsonage, and was large enough
to row a punt on, if one kept exactly in the middle.

Dominus Peder in Rasbo had awakened at sunrise, kissed his wife and
children, and gone to the church which lay a few stone's-throws from
the parsonage. He had read the morning Mass, blessed the work of the
day, and come home again beaming with joy and cheerfulness. The larks,
which certainly did not understand the difference between beauty and
ugliness, had sung over the stony fields as though they blessed the
meagre crop. Water flowed murmuring in the ditches on whose edges
gleamed yellow colt's-foot. The priest had come home, drunk his morning
milk in the porch, and now he stood in his jerkin in the garden and
released his flowers from their winter covering. He took a hoe and
began to turn up the sleeping ground. The sun glowed; the work to which
he was unaccustomed stirred his blood. He inhaled deep draughts of the
strong spring air and felt as robust as though he had awakened to new
life. His wife had opened the window-shutters on the sunny side of the
house, and stood there dressing, while she watched her husband at work.

"That is better than sitting over books," he said.

"You ought to have been a peasant," she replied.

"I could not, my dear! Ah, how it does one's breast and back good! Why
do people think God has given us two long arms if they are not to be
used."

"Yes, one does not need them to read with."

"No! but to shovel snow, to hew wood, to dig the ground, to carry
one's children, and to defend oneself--that's what they are for, and
one is punished if one does not use them. We 'spiritual' men, we must
not touch this sinful earth."

"Hush!" said his wife, and laid her finger on her mouth, "the children
hear you."

Her husband took off his cap and wiped the perspiration from his brow.

"'In the sweat of thy brow thou shalt eat bread,' so it is written.
Oh, how finely I sweat! That is something better than when anxiety at
not being able to discover the sense of an obscure text makes one feel
a cold sweat at the roots of one's hair, or when the spirits of doubt
burn the goodness out of one's blood so that it creeps through the body
like hot sand. Do you see how the flesh on my arm quivers for joy at
being able to move? See how the blue veins swell like streamlets in
spring when the ice melts, my chest feels so broad that the seams of
the jerkin crack; that is really better----"

"Hush!" said his wife, warning him again, and added, in order to divert
the dangerous current of his talk, "You have released your flowers from
their strait-waistcoats, but you have forgotten the poor animals who
have stood all through the winter in their dark stable."

"That is true," said the priest, and put the hoe aside; "but then the
children must come out and see."

He went at once to the cattle-house which stood at the back of the row
of buildings of which the farm consisted; there he set free the two
cows, opened the sheep and the calf sheds, then went up the little
acclivity behind and opened the door of the pigsty. First came out one
cow and stood in the door of the cow-house. The light seemed to dazzle
her as she stretched out her neck and became aware of the sun; then
she stepped carefully on the bridge and drew some deep breaths so that
her stomach swelled; then she smelt the ground and as though seized by
joyful recollections of the previous year, she erected her tail and
danced up the little hill, leapt over stones and bushes and went off
at full gallop. Then followed the other cow, the calves and sheep, and
lastly the pigs. But behind them came the priest with a stick, for
he had forgotten to shut the garden gate, and now there was a race,
in which the boys eagerly joined, to drive the animals out of the
enclosure. But when the old cook saw her master run up the hill in his
jerkin she was anxious what people would say and rushed out from the
kitchen door, while his wife stood on the steps and laughed merrily.
But the young priest was so boisterous and joyful and delighted as a
child at witnessing the delight of the creatures at the end of their
winter imprisonment, that he forgot both congregation and bishop and
ran out on to the high-road in order to drive the animals on to the
fallow ground.

Then he heard his wife call his name, and when he turned round he saw
a woman standing by her in the porch. Feeling ashamed and annoyed, he
pulled his clothes straight, put his hair under his cap, and turned
homewards assuming a solemn expression of face.

As he came nearer he recognised the little woman whom he had exhorted
in the charge regarding discord in marriage. He perceived that she
wished for a conversation, and asked her to come in, saying he would
follow as soon as he had changed his coat.

In another coat and another mind he entered, after a time, the room
where the unruly wife awaited him, and asked her business. She
declared that she had come to an understanding with her husband that
she should leave his house deliberately, since the Church would not
grant a divorce in any other way. The priest was impatient and wished
straightway to quote the Decretals and the Epistle to the Corinthians,
when through the open window he heard the sound of a foot on the sanded
garden-walk. He knew so well the light, soft step, and the crunching of
the sand made an impression on his conscience.

"The act you contemplate, woman," he said, "is courageous, but it is
nevertheless a crime."

"It is no crime; you only call it so," answered the woman decidedly,
as though she had spent days and nights of despair in considering her
action.

The priest was irritated, and sought in his mind for some cutting words
when he heard again the sound of sharp crunching on the sand outside.

"You set a bad example to the congregation," he said.

"A worse one, if I remain," said the woman.

"You will be disinherited."

"I know."

"You will lose your reputation."

"I know that too, but I will bear it for I am innocent."

"But your child?"

"I will take it with me."

"What does your husband say to that? You have no claim on your child
if you leave your home."

"Haven't I? Not on my own child? Then Solomon's wisdom itself is not
sufficient to solve this tangled knot. But I will tear it in two, if
I can make an end by doing so. I came to you to ask for light and
you lead me into a dark passage, where you put out the light and go
your way. One thing I know: where love ceases, there only shame and
humiliation remain; I will not live in sin, therefore I break off."

Outside deep breaths, as of suppressed feelings, were heard. The priest
struggled with himself, then he said: "As the servant of the Church, I
have only to hold to the word of the Lord, and that is hard as a rock.
As a man, I can only say what my heart suggests but what is perhaps
sin, for the human heart is a frail thing. Go in peace, and put not
asunder what God has joined."

"No, not what God has joined, but what our parents arranged. Have you
not a word of comfort to say to me on the difficult path I have to
tread?"

The priest shook his head negatively.

"May you not receive stones some day when you want bread," said the
woman with an almost threatening look, and went out.

The priest threw off his coat again, sighed, and tried to drive away
the uncomfortable feelings which the interview had caused. When he came
out, he approached his wife with the remark that he was sincerely sorry
for the poor woman.

"Why didn't you tell her so?" broke in his wife, who seemed to be well
posted in the matter.

"There are things which one cannot say," answered her husband.

"To whom cannot one say them?"

"To whom? The Church, like the State, my friend, are Divine ideas, but
being reduced to reality by weak men, are only imperfectly realised.
Therefore one cannot confess before ordinary mortals that these
arrangements are imperfect, for then they would begin to doubt their
Divine origin."

"But if one, seeing their imperfection, should doubt of their Divine
origin, and it should be shown, on examination, that they have no
Divine origin?"

"I believe, by all the saints, that the devil of doubt reigns in the
air of this time. Do you not know that the first questioner plunged
mankind into damnation? Certainly it was not without reason that the
Papal Legate in the recent Church Assembly called our land corrupted."

His wife looked at him as if she wanted to see how far he was in
earnest, whereon her husband answered with a smile, which showed that
he was jesting.

"You must not joke like that," said his wife. "I can so easily believe
what you say. Besides, I never know when you are serious or making fun.
You believe partly what you say, but partly not. You are so wavering,
as though you yourself had been possessed by those spirits in the air
of which you spoke."

In order not to proceed further in discussing a question which he
preferred to leave untouched, the priest proposed to make a boat
excursion to a pleasant spot which had the advantage of some leafy
trees, and eat their midday meal there.

Presently he was plying his oars and the green punt shot over the
smooth surface of the water, while the children tried to pull up the
old reeds of the previous year, through whose dry leaves the spring
wind whispered of resurrection from the winter's sleep. The priest had
taken off his long coat and put on his jerkin, which he called his
"old man." He pulled the oars strongly, like a practised rower, the
whole half-mile to the birch-planted height, which lay like an island
in the stony waste around. While his wife prepared the meal, he ran
about with the children and plucked anemones and primroses. He taught
them to shoot with bow and arrow, and cut willow-whistles for them.
He climbed the trees, rolled on the grass like a boy, and let himself
be driven like a horse with a bit in his mouth by the loudly laughing
children. He grew ever more boisterous, and when the boys took the long
coat which he had hung on a birch tree as a mark to shoot at, he began
to laugh till he was purple in the face. But his wife looked carefully
round on all sides to see whether anyone was watching them. "Ah! let me
be at any rate a man in God's free world of nature," he said. And she
had no objection to make.

The meal was laid on the grass, and the priest was so hungry that he
forgot to say grace, which drew a remark from the children.

"Father does not say grace at table," they said.

"I see no table," he answered, and stuck his thumb in the butter. This
delighted the children immensely.

"Keep your feet still under the table, Peter! Don't lay your legs on
the table, Nils," he said, and the little ones laughed till they nearly
choked. Never had they been so jolly; never had they seen their father
so cheerful, and he had constantly to repeat his jests, which they
heard at each repetition with the same delight.

But evening was coming on and they had to think of their return home.
They packed up the things and got into the boat. They were still
cheerful for a while, but soon the laughter grew silent and the
children went to sleep on their mother's lap. The father sat quiet and
serious, as one is after laughing much, and the nearer they approached
the house the more silent he became. He tried at intervals to say
something cheerful, but it sounded quite melancholy. The sun threw
slanting rays over the huge fields; the wind had fallen; there reigned
a depressing silence and deep stillness in all nature, only broken now
and then by the lowing of cattle or the passionate crying of the cuckoo.

"Cuckoo in the north brings sorrow forth," said the priest, as though
he would thereby give a long-sought expression to his melancholy.

"That is only true of the first time one hears it," said his wife,
comforting him.

The roof of the cattle-shed was now visible, and behind it stood the
church tower. They moored the punt by the bridge and the father took
the two sleeping children and carried them into the house. Then he
kissed his wife and thanked her for the pleasant day; he would now go
to church, he said, and read vespers.

He took his book and went. When he came on the road the Angelus was
ringing. He hastened his steps. From a good distance he saw people
moving in the churchyard. Something unusual must be going on, as no
one besides the sacristan generally attended vespers. He thought that
someone had perhaps seen him on the island, and heard his conversation
with his wife. He felt seriously anxious when he approached the church
door, for there he perceived two horses with gorgeous trappings and an
archdeacon with his retinue from Upsala, where the Archbishop lived.
The archdeacon seemed to have been waiting, for he went immediately
towards the priest and said that he wished to make a communication
to him when vespers were over. Never had the priest read the evening
service so fervently, and with deep anxiety he invoked the protection
of all the saints against unknown dangers. He cast a glance now
and then at the door, where he saw the archdeacon standing like an
executioner waiting for his victim, and when he had said "Amen" he went
with heavy steps to receive the blow, for now he was certain that a
misfortune was impending.

"I did not wish to visit you in your house," began the Archbishop's
messenger, "because my business is of such a nature that it demands a
quiet place and the proximity of the holy things which strengthen our
hearts. I have a message from the Church council to deliver which will
deeply affect the intimacies of your private life."

Here he broke off, for he saw his victim's anxiety, and handed over a
parchment which the young priest unrolled and read:

"Dilectis in Christo fratribus (dear brothers in Christ), Episcopus,
Sabinensis, apostolicae sedis legatis (the Bishop of Sabina, Legate of
the Roman Chair)----"

His eyes flew over the crowded letters, till they stopped all at once
at a line which seemed to be written in fire, for the young man's
features became as pale as ashes.

The archdeacon seemed to feel sympathy with him and said: "It appears
that the demands of the Church are severe: before the close of the year
the marriages of all priests are to be dissolved, for a true servant of
the Lord cannot live united to a wife without defiling the holy things
which he handles, and his heart cannot be divided between Christ and a
sinful descendant of the first woman."

"'What God hath joined, that shall not man put asunder,'" answered the
priest as soon as he came to himself.

"That is only true for ordinary people; but when the higher aims of the
Church of Christ demand it, then what would otherwise be wrong becomes
lawful. And mark well the distinction--'_Man_ shall not put asunder.'
The saying, therefore, simply refers to man acting as the divider; but
here God acts through His servant, and sunders what God has united,
therefore it does not apply here."

"But God has ordained marriage Himself," objected the broken man.

"Just what I say, and therefore He has a right to dissolve it."

"But the Lord does not desire this sacrifice from his weak servant."

"The Lord commanded Abraham to sacrifice his son."

"But our hearts will break."

"Just so; hearts ought to break--that makes them more ardent in piety."

"I That can never be the wish of a loving God."

"The 'loving' God caused His own Son to be slain on the Cross. The
world is no pleasure-garden, but merely vain and transient, and you may
comfort yourself with the thought that the Decretals----"

"No, for God's sake, don't talk to me of Decretals! Archdeacon, in
heaven's name give me a spark of hope; dip the tip of your finger in
water and quench this fire of despair which you have kindled. Say that
it is not possible; try to believe that it was only a proposal which
was not adopted."

The archdeacon pointed to his seal and said, "Presentibus consulentibus
et consentientibus (it is already decided and confirmed). And as
regards the Decretals, my young friend, there are in them such
treasures of wisdom that they may well serve to clear up a clouded
mind, and if I want to give a good friend a piece of good advice, I
say, 'Read the Decretals; read them early and late, and you will find
that they make you feel calm and happy.'"

The unhappy priest thought of the stones which he had given on the
morning of the same day to the despairing woman, and bowed his head to
the blow.

"Therefore," concluded the archdeacon, "enjoy the short time left; the
summer wind has blown, the flowers have sprung up in the field, and
the voice of the turtle is heard in our land. On St Sylvester's Day
_ultimo mensis Decembris_ I come here again, and then must your house
be swept and garnished, as though Christ the Lord was about to enter,
under penalty of excommunication. Till then you can study the decree
more closely. Farewell, and forget not to read the Decretals."

He mounted his white horse and rode away in order to reach the next
parish before night and to spread grief and misery there, like the
rider in the Apocalypse.

Dominus Peder in Rasbo was crushed. He did not venture to go home at
once but rushed into the church, where he fell down by the altar.
The doors of the gilded altar-triptych stood open, and the Saviour's
progress to Calvary was illumined by the red rays of the evening sun.
The priest was at this moment not the justiciary of a minatory and
threatening Lord, but he lay like one of the chastised flock and prayed
for mercy. He looked up to the image of Christ but found no sympathy
there. The Saviour took His cup from the hand that offered it and
emptied it to the dregs; He carried His cross on His mangled back up
the steep hill where He was to be crucified, but over the Crucified
heaven opened. There was then something over and beyond all these
sorrows. The priest began to examine into the reasons of these great
human sacrifices which were about to take place all over the country.
The Church had seen how men began to doubt in the priest's right to be
judge and executioner, for they had found their judges full of human
weaknesses. Now the priests must show that for Christ's sake they could
tear their hearts out of their breasts and lay them on the altar.

"But," continued his rebellious reason, "Christianity has done away
with human sacrifices." He went on thinking, and the idea occurred
to him that perhaps there was something underlying the old heathen
sacrifices. Abraham was a heathen, for he did not know Christ, and he
was ready to offer his son at God's command. Christ was sacrificed;
all holy martyrs are sacrificed--why should he be spared? There was no
reason why he should, and he had to acknowledge that if people were to
continue to believe in his preaching they could also demand that, he
should sacrifice his dearest himself, for he and his wife were one.
He had to acknowledge this, and he felt a peculiar new enjoyment in
the thought of the terrible sufferings which awaited him. Pride also
came to his support and pointed to the martyr's crown which would
elevate him above this congregation, on whom he was accustomed to look
down from the high altar, but who had begun to raise their heads and
defiantly threatened to storm this lofty position.

Strengthened and elevated by this thought, he rose and passed within
the altar-rails. He was, in his own eyes, no more the crushed sinner,
but the righteous man who deserved to stand by Christ's side for he had
suffered as much as He. He looked proudly down on the praying-stools
which in the twilight resembled penitents kneeling, and he hurled
the denunciations of a prophet on their heads because they would not
believe in his preaching. He tore his coat open and showed them his
bleeding breast in which an empty gap showed that he had given God his
heart. He bade those of little faith to put their hands in his side and
let themselves be carried over by him. He felt himself grow during his
suffering, and his over-excited imagination transported him into an
ecstasy, so that the operations of thought seemed momentarily suspended
and he believed that he was one with Christ. Further than that he could
not go, and he collapsed like a sail which has been split by the wind,
when the sexton came in to close the church.

On the way home be felt unhappy because his ecstasy was over, and
he would have gladly returned to the church had not an indefinite
something, which expressed itself as a faint sense of duty, summoned
him home. The nearer he approached the more his religious emotions
cooled, and the smaller therefore he felt himself. But when he entered
the door, his wife received him with open arms, asking him uneasily
why he had remained out so long; and when he felt the friendly glow of
his hearth, and saw the children peacefully asleep with rosy cheeks,
he realised the preciousness of what he had now to surrender. He felt
all his young blood well up in his opened heart, and was conscious
of the reawakening of the omnipotent force of first love which can
bear everything. He swore never to leave the beloved of his heart,
and the married pair felt themselves young again. They sat together
till midnight talking of the future and how to escape the danger which
threatened them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The summer passed for the happy pair like a beautiful dream, during
which they forgot the wakening which awaited them. Meanwhile the papal
decree had become known to the congregation, who heard of it with a
sort of malicious satisfaction--partly because they did not grudge
their spiritual superiors a little purgatorial fire, and partly because
they hoped to get their priests more cheaply when they had to live as
celibates. Moreover, there were in the congregation a number of pious
people who received whatever came from Bishop and Pope as though it
came from heaven. They discussed the question thoroughly and adhered
to the view that a priest's marriage was sinful. These pious people,
who had expected to see the parsonage purified immediately after the
promulgation of the decree, began to murmur when they saw that their
pastor gave no signs whatever of intending to obey it. The murmuring
grew in strength when the church-tower happened to be struck by
lightning. This was followed by a failure in the harvest. The voices of
complaint became louder and the pious party sent a deputation to the
parsonage to declare that they did not intend to receive the sacrament
at the hands of a priest who lived in sin. They demanded that he should
separate from his wife, because any more children which might be born
would be illegitimate, and they threatened to purify the parsonage with
fire if it were not pure by the end of the year.

For a long time after that the pair were left in peace, but a marked
change began to be observable in the priest. He went oftener into the
church than he needed to, and remained there till late in the evening.
He was reserved and cold towards his wife, and seemed as though he were
nervous to meet her. He would take his children for hours on his lap
and caress them without saying a word.

At Martinmas, in November, the archdeacon from the cathedral city came
on a visit and had a long talk with the priest. That night the latter
slept in the attic and continued to sleep there. His wife said nothing,
but saw the course of events without the prospect of being able to
alter anything. Her pride forbade her to make any advance, and as her
husband began to take his meals alone, they met seldom. He was as pale
as ashes, and his eyes were sunken in his head; he never ate in the
evening, and slept on the bare ground under a sealskin rug.

Then came Christmas-time. Two days before Christmas the priest came
into the house and sat by the oven. His wife was mending the children's
clothes. For some time there was a dreadful silence; at last the man
said: "The children must have something for Christmas; who will go to
the town?"

"I will," answered his wife, "but I take the children with me. Do you
agree?"

"I have prayed the Lord that this cup might pass from me, but He has
not willed it, and I have answered, 'Let not my will but Thine be
done!'"

"Are you sure that you know the Lord's will?" said his wife
submissively.

"As sure as my soul lives!"

"I will go to-morrow to my father and mother, who are expecting me,"
said his wife in a sad but firm voice.

The priest stood up and went out hastily, as though he had heard his
death-sentence. The evening sky was sparkling and cold, the stars
glimmered in the blue-grey depths, and the boundless expanse of the
snow-covered plain lay before the despairing wanderer, whose way seemed
to point towards the lowest stars of the sky, which seemed as though
they had risen out of the white earth. He wandered and wandered on and
on; he felt like a tethered horse which runs but is pulled back by
the rope whenever it thinks itself free. He passed by houses brightly
lit up, and saw how people scoured and swept and baked and cooked
in preparation for the approaching Christmas. Thoughts of his own
approaching Christmas awoke in him. He imagined his house unheated,
unlighted, without her, without the children. His feet were burning
but his body felt freezing. He went on and on without knowing whither.

At last he stood before a house. The shutters were fastened, but a ray
of light shone out and threw a yellow gleam upon the snow. He went
nearer and put his eye to the chink. He saw into a room in which the
seats and tables were covered with clothes--little children's shirts,
stockings and coats. A large box stood open; on the cover of it hung a
white dress whose graceful shape attracted his attention; it evidently
belonged to a young woman, and on one shoulder was fastened a green
garland. Was it a shroud or a bridal dress? He wondered with himself
why corpses and brides were dressed in the same way. He saw a shadow
thrown upon the wall--sometimes it was so large that it was broken by
the ceiling and vanished in it; sometimes it crept down to the floor.
At last it remained stationary on the upper part of the white dress.
A small head wearing a cap was thrown into sharp relief against the
bright background. This forehead, this nose, this mouth was familiar
to him. Where was he? The shadow sank into the box, and into the light
there came a face which could belong to no living person, so pale and
unspeakably suffering did it appear. It looked him in the eyes so that
they smarted, and he felt the tears roll down his cheeks and melt
the snow on the window-ledge. The eyes of the face were so soft and
pleading that he thought he saw St Katherine on the wheel, praying the
Emperor Decius for mercy. Yes, that was she, and he was the Emperor.
Should he grant her mercy? No; "give that which is Cæsar's unto Cæsar,"
says the Scripture. No mercy! But he could not endure these looks, if
he was to continue to be strong; therefore he must go.

He now went into the garden, where the snow lay deep on his
straw-covered flower-beds so that they looked like little children's
graves. Who lay in them? His children. His happy, rosy-cheeked
children, whom God had commanded him to sacrifice, as Abraham
sacrificed Isaac. But Abraham escaped with only a fright. That must
be a God of hell, Who could be so inhuman. It must be a bad God Who
preached love to men but Himself behaved like an executioner. He would
go at once and seek Him; seek Him in His own house, speak with Him, and
demand an explanation.

He left the garden and waded through the snow-drifts till he reached
a little fir tree by the wood-shed, and laid hold of it. That was a
Christmas-tree like one the children would have danced round had
they lived. Now he remembered that he wanted to seek the God Who had
taken his children in order to bring him to account. The church was
not far, but when he came to it it was closed. Then he became frantic.
He scraped away the snow till he got hold of a large stone, and with
that he began to hammer the door till the echoes from the church
sounded like thunder, while he shouted loudly: "Come out, Moloch,
child-devourer! I will split up your stomach! Come out, St Katharine
and all saints and devils! You must fight with the Emperor Decius in
Rasbo! Oho! You come from behind, legions of the abyss!" He turned
round to the churchyard, and with the strength of a madman he broke
down a young lime tree, and using it as a weapon he attacked the crowd
of little grave-crosses which with out-stretched arms seemed to be
marching against him. They did not flinch, and he mowed them down like
Death with his scythe, not stopping till he had laid every one flat and
the ground was covered with splinters of wood.

But his strength was not yet exhausted. Now he would plunder the
corpses of his enemies and collect the dead and wounded. Load after
load he carried to the wall of the church and piled them under a
window. When he had finished he climbed on the pile, broke a pane
of glass, and got into the church. The inside was quite lit up by
the northern lights which had hitherto been hidden from him by the
high roof of the church. He made a new raid on the threatening
prayer-stools, which he battered into a heap of fragments. His eyes
now rested on the high altar, where throned above the pictures of the
Passion a figure sat on a cloud with the lightnings of the law in his
hand. The priest crossed his arms and regarded defiantly the severe
figure on the cloud. "Come down!" he shrieked. "Come down! We will
wrestle together!" When he saw that his challenge was not accepted,
he seized a block of wood and hurled it at his enemy. It crashed on a
plaster ornament, which fell down and raised a cloud of dust.

He took another piece of wood and then another and hurled them with the
mounting rage of disappointment. The clouds fell piece by piece, while
he laughed loudly, the lightnings were torn out of the hand of the
figure; at last the heavy piece of carving fell with a terrible crash
on the altar and smashed the candlesticks in its fall.

But then the blasphemer was seized with a panic and sprang out of the
window.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the morning of the day before Christmas a parishioner had seen a
strange sight by the hedge of the parsonage garden. A sledge came out
of the enclosure containing a woman, two children, and a servant, and
was driven westwards. At about a quarter of a mile distant it was
followed by the priest running and calling out for the sledge to stop.
But it had continued to proceed till it vanished round a bend of the
high-road. Then the priest had fallen into a snow-drift, shaking his
clenched fist against the sky. Later information came to the effect
that the priest lay very ill with fever, and that the devil, in anger
that he had not overcome the servant of the Lord in the battle waged
for the dissolution of his marriage, had raged in the most terrible
way in the church. But in order to enter it, and to exercise his power
there, he had first broken down all the crosses in the churchyard. All
this restored the priest's reputation and even gave him an appearance
of sanctity, which especially pleased the pious party who had been the
instigators of the purification of the parsonage.

       *       *       *       *       *

The priest lay ill for three months and could not go out till April. He
had become old. His face was full of angles, his eyes had lost their
brightness, his mouth was half open, his back was bent. On the south
side of the house he had a seat where he could sit in the warmth of the
sun, buried in dreams of the past which hardly possessed any reality
for him, especially as he had received no news from those whom he had
once called his own.

Then the month of May returned with flowers and the song of birds. The
priest went into his garden and saw how it was overgrown with weeds;
his precious flowers were killed by the frost because no one had seen
to their being covered, and they now lay mouldering like rags upon the
earth. It never occurred to him for a moment to break up the soil round
the flower-beds or to do anything else of the kind, since he had no
one for whom to work and there would be no tending hand to protect the
young growths. He stood by the fence and looked out over the landscape.
The plain stretched away in the sunlight and the little brook rippled
merrily and invited his eyes to follow the little wavelets, which
danced by and aroused his longing to follow them southwards, where they
met the river. He unmoored his boat, sat in it without touching the
rudder, and let it drift with the stream, gliding on thus for about two
hours.

Suddenly he was aware of the fresh scent of budding birches and spring
flowers. He looked round; the plain had ceased, and he found himself at
the beginning of the little birch wood. Memories of the previous year
rose in him; bright, phantom-like images hovered above the primroses
and anemones. He stepped on shore and went up the hill. Here they had
eaten their lunch; here on this branch hung the coat at which the boys
had shot with their bows. He saw the hole which he had bored in the
birch tree to draw off the sap, which the little ones had drunk. The
willow still bore scars from the knife with which he had cut arrows.
He found an arrow in the grass; how they had hunted for it--the best
he had ever cut, which flew above the top of the highest birch tree!
He hunted in the grass and bushes like a pointer; he upturned the
stones, bent back the branches, raised up the previous year's grass,
scratched away the leaves. What he sought for exactly he did not
know, but he wished to find something which might remind him of her.
Finally he stood by a hawthorn bush; there hung a small fragment of
a piece of red woollen cloth on a thorn. It was set in motion by the
wind and fluttered like a pretty butterfly between the white hawthorn
blossoms--a butterfly pierced by a needle. Then there came a second
gust of wind and turned it round, so that it looked like a bleeding
heart--a heart that was torn from a victim's breast and hung on a tree.
He took it down from the bush, held it to his mouth, breathed on it,
kissed it, and hid it in his hand. Here she had played "soldiers" with
the children, and they had trodden on her dress.

He lay down on the grass and wept; he called her name and the
children's. So long did he weep that he fell asleep from exhaustion.

When he awoke he remained lying as he was for a time and looked with
half-closed eyes over the grass meadow. His eyes fell on a large
willow bush whose yellow tassels hung like golden ears of corn in the
sunshine. His tears had calmed him and produced a certain peace in his
mind; sorrow and joy had ceased, and his soul felt in equipoise. The
reason that his eye rested on the willow bush was that it was directly
in his line of sight. A gentle wind swayed the branches lightly, and
their movement seemed to soothe his tear-reddened eyes. Suddenly the
branches of the bush stopped swaying with a jerk; there was a rustling,
and a hand bent the boughs to one side; a sunlit female figure appeared
framed in the gold of the willow tassels and the green of the tender
leafage.

He still lay a while watching the beautiful sight, as when one looks
at a picture. Then his eyes met hers, which looked out of the bush like
two stars; they kindled, as it were, flame in his expiring spirit. His
body rose from the earth and his feet carried him forward; he stretched
out his arms, and the next moment he felt a small warm creature nestle
on his stony bosom, which was again filled with the breath of life, and
a long kiss melted the ice which had so long held his spirit imprisoned.

       *       *       *       *       *

Eight days later the archdeacon came on a visit to the parsonage at
Rasbo. He found the priest happy and contented. The archdeacon had a
commission which made him somewhat embarrassed, and he found he had
to express himself suitably. Rumours, he said, had been heard in the
congregation which had reached to the Archbishop's chair. One should
not certainly believe all reports, but the mere fact of a report
arising was itself half a proof. The priest, to speak plainly, was
said to be having assignations with a woman. The Archbishop was fully
aware of the storm which the Papal Bull regarding priests' marriages
had occasioned. The Holy Father himself had recognised the cruelty
involved in the new law, and had therefore thought it advisable through
a special "licentia occulta" (a secret permission) to make the lives
of the clergy less difficult. Woman, it must be admitted, was the
presiding genius of home life.

Here the current of his eloquence stopped, and in a low, scarcely
audible voice the messenger of Christ whispered the secret sanction.

The priest answered, "Then the Church does not allow a priest to have a
wife, but only a mistress?"

"Don't use such strong words! We call it a 'housekeeper.'"

"Well then," said the priest, "if I take my wife as a housekeeper, the
Church has nothing against it?"

"No! No! Take any other, but not her. The aims of the Church! Remember!"

"The _higher_ aims of the Church," you said. "So it was to annul the
right of inheritance and to get possession of land that the Church
insisted on divorce, not in order to check sin! You consider therefore
the unlawful seizure of other people's property as 'higher aims.' Very
well then! I will have nothing to do with the Church. Excommunicate me,
and I will consider it an honour to be excluded from the fellowship of
the noble Church. Depose me from my office, and I will be so far away
before you have been able to write your proclamation that you will
never be able to find a trace of me. Greet the Holy Father from me,
archdeacon, and tell him that I do not accept his dirty offer. Greet
him and say that the gods whom our forefathers worshipped above the
clouds and in the sun were greater and much purer than these Roman and
Semitic cattle-drivers whom you have foisted upon us. Greet him and
say that you have met a man who will devote his whole future life to
converting Christians to heathenism, and that a day will come when the
new heathen will undertake crusades against the vicegerent of Christ
and His followers who wish to introduce the custom of sacrificing men
alive, whereas the heathen contented themselves with killing them. And
now, archdeacon, take your Decretals and go away before I flog you
soundly. You have nearly killed two people here with your invisible
'higher aims,' and the whole land calls down a curse on you. Go with
my curse; break your legs on the high-road; die in a ditch; may the
lightning strike you and robbers plunder you; may the ghosts of your
dead relations haunt you; may incendiaries set your house on fire--for
I excommunicate you from the society of all honourable men, as I
excommunicate myself from the Holy Church! Get out!"

The archdeacon did not remain long in the parsonage; nor did the
priest, for his wife and children were waiting for him by the hill
planted with birch trees on the way to the wood on the border of
Vestmanland, where he was going to plant a settlement.




PAUL AND PETER


Christmas Eve lay bitterly cold and silent as death over Stockholm;
everything living seemed to be frozen; there was not a breath of wind
and the stars seemed to be flickering like little flames in order to
keep themselves alive. A lonely watchman ran up and down the street to
keep his feet from freezing, and the beams cracked in the old wooden
houses.

In the dwelling of the tradesman Paul Hörning in the Drachenturm Street
his wife had already risen. She did not venture to light a candle or to
kindle a fire, for the early-morning bell in the city church had not
sounded, but she expected it every moment for she knew it was about
four o'clock. The whole household was going to early Christmas Mass at
Spånga, and must have something warm first. She searched for her Sunday
clothes which she had laid on a chair, and dressed herself in the
dark as well as she could; but as she found waiting in the darkness
wearisome, she lit a horn-lantern, trusting that the watchman would
respect the peace of Christmas and not raise an alarm, and then she
stole around the low little rooms.

Her husband was still half asleep and little Sven was far away in
the land of dreams, although he lay with his head on a wooden horse
and a feather ball in his hand. Karin, who had been confirmed in the
autumn, was still asleep behind the curtain, and had hung her new
velvet jacket and her necklace of Bohemian crystal on the bedpost.
The Christmas-tree, with its red apples and Spanish nuts, threw long,
jagged shadows over everything and made it look ghostly in the faint
light.

The mother went out into the kitchen and awoke Lisa in the box-room,
who started up with tempestuous hurry and lit the candle in the iron
candlestick; she was not anxious about the light being seen, for she
was good friends with the night-watchman Truls, and besides, the
kitchen lay at the back of the house. Then the mother knocked on the
ceiling with the broom handle for Olle the shop-boy, who slept in the
attic, and he knocked three times with his shoes in reply.

After that she went again into the bedroom and sewed a hook and eye
firmly on her husband's starched and smoothly ironed shirt with its
stiff collar. Then she took little Sven's red stockings out of the
great oak chest, and held them against the light, and busied herself
with one or two other small matters. Finally she awoke Karin, who put
two small freshly bathed feet in straw shoes and began to dress behind
the curtain, for there was very little room.

Sven awoke of his own accord; his cheek had a red mark where it had
rested on the wooden horse, and he began at once to throw his feather
ball, which flew over the curtain and hit his father on the nose,
awaking him, so that he grunted a greeting of "Happy Christmas!" from
his huge bed which was built like a small house. Sven wanted to run
behind the curtain and see his sister's Christmas presents, but she
screamed and said he mustn't for she was just washing herself.

Then the city church bell began to ring for early Mass; all murmured a
blessing. Mother set the chandelier in the large room; Sven came there
with nothing but his shirt on and sat under the Christmas-tree trying
to make himself and others believe that he was in a wood. Then be
gnawed the back side of an apple so that it should not be seen, but the
apple revolved on the thread by which it was suspended; mother came and
said she would slap him if he did not go at once and dress himself.
Lisa lit the fire on the hearth so that the flame roared up the
chimney, and placed the milk kettle on it; mother spread a cloth over
the great table in the sitting-room and set out the plates, putting the
brightly polished silver jug in father's place, then she cut slices of
bread and butter and ham, for one must have something before going out
so early.

Olle had already been a good time on his legs and gone into the stable;
he had awakened Jöns the stable-man and curry-combed the chestnut
horses. The sledge was drawn out of the coach-house and the rugs were
dusted; soon the sledge stood in the street and Olle kindled the
torches, which lit up the walls of the house like a conflagration.
Jöns cracked the whip as a signal that the horses had been harnessed,
and the latter snorted and scraped the ground with their hoofs to show
their impatience.

In the house they were searching for their upper garments--furs and
hoods, cloth-shoes and muffs; Karin, who was ready first, went down and
offered Olle and Jöns a drink of hot ale. When Paul Hörning was dressed
he took a glass of French mulled wine. His wife locked everything up
and came after him with Sven and Lisa, and so they were all safe and
sound outside in the street.

The sledge was a strong one, as roomy as a barge, and had three seats;
on the first sat Paul and his wife and little Sven, on the second,
Karin and Olle, and on the last Lisa and Jöns with the torches. Paul
got in last for he had to see whether the horses were properly shod,
and whether the harness was straight; then he got in, and his weight
made the body of the sledge creak. He took the reins, asked once more
if anything had been forgotten, cracked the whip, nodded to the windows
of his old wooden house, and then they were off! First to the Great
Market, where they met other good friends among the horse-possessing
citizens of Stockholm. There they sat already in their sledges--stout
brewers and thin bakers, and the whole market-place was lighted up by
their smoking torches. The horses' bells tinkled, and now the whole
procession began to move down the slope and out of the northern city
gate.

"I am wondering how Brother Peter will receive us this year," said Paul
to his wife when they had settled down for the drive.

"Why so?" she asked, somewhat uneasily.

"Oh, of course, he has no reason, but I think I annoyed him too much
last year about the salt, and since then, according to my observation,
he has been rather reserved."

"Well, if it were so he would not show it, I think; you two do not
meet so often, and although you are not real brothers, you have always
considered yourselves such."

"But Mats is very resentful, and if there were the slightest
difficulty, it would stop all prospect of a match between him and
Karin. We will see! We will see!"

Little Sven sat below in the straw and held the ends of the reins in
the belief that he was driving. Olle, the shop-boy, tried to talk
sentimentally to Karin, but her thoughts were somewhere else and she
did not answer; Lisa, however, let Jöns hide her hand in his great
glove, and sometimes she helped him to hold the torch when his hand
froze.

Outside the city they passed under the ridge of the Brunkeberg, over
the moor, and on the high-road towards Upsala. Soon between the fir
trees the lights of the church of Solna were visible, glimmering in
the dark winter morning. Here Paul parted from his fellow-townsmen,
who remained there because they wished to go by the Westeras road to
Spånga. Soon little Sven was wondering at the great Christmas-trees on
both sides of the road, which were lit up at intervals by the torches
and immediately hidden in darkness again. He thought he saw kobolds
standing behind the tree-trunks with their red caps and beckoning, but
his father told him they were only the red reflections of the torches
flying and running, for his father was an intelligent townsman who no
longer believed in kobolds.

Sven thought that the great Christmas-trees were running along by the
side of the sledge, and that the stars were dancing over their tops,
but his mother told him that God dwelt in the stars and that they were
dancing to-day for joy that the Christ-Child was born, and Sven quite
understood that.

Now they passed over a bridge which rumbled under the horses' hoofs,
the wood became clearer, the plain expanded before them, and little
hills planted with birch copses appeared here and there. Presently a
light shone from a cottage window and they saw someone carrying a torch
towards it. In the distance above the plain appeared the morning-star,
shining very large and bright. Olle the shop-boy told Karin that it was
the star which had led the shepherds to Bethlehem, but Karin knew that
herself, for in a large town one knows everything, and Olle was from
the country.

The road took one more turn, and through the long boughs of the
leafless lime trees the church could be seen with all its windows
brightly lit up. By the church wall the torches had been thrown into a
great blazing pile by which the coachmen warmed themselves after they
had taken the horses to the stable. Paul cracked his whip, swept past
the bonfire in a stately curve, and made his chestnut horses curvet
before the admiring peasants.

At the church door they met Peter and his wife and his tall son Mats.
They embraced each other, wished each other a happy Christmas, and
asked after one another's health. After they had talked for a while,
the bells rang a second time, and then they entered the church. There
it was as cold as though one were sitting in the sea, but they did not
feel it for they froze in good company, and for the rest they had the
preaching and the singing to keep them warm. The young ones had so much
to look at; they went about and greeted each other, and were never
tired of staring at the great chandeliers.

When at last the early service was at an end and they came out again
on the hill, the stars shone no longer, but in the east the sky was
reddish yellow like a ripe apple. Then they trotted quickly to Peter's
house. It was a large one with back premises, guest-rooms, and
bed-rooms on the attic floor. By one of the railing posts was tied an
unthreshed sheaf of corn on which the sparrows had already settled and
were keeping Christmas; at the house door stood two fir trees which
sparkled in the frost.

Peter placed himself there and bid his foster-brother and his
belongings welcome; then they entered the house and took off their
furs. Peter's wife, who had gone before them, stood by the fire and
heated ale, his son Mats helped Karin to take off her fur, and Sven
was already rolling in the Christmas straw which covered the ground to
the depth of half a yard. Paul and his wife were led to the sofa and
took their place under the blue and red hangings on which were depicted
Christ's entry into Jerusalem, and the Three Wise Men, while Peter sat
down in a high armchair.

The long table presented a stately appearance, for there was not a
handbreadth which was not covered with a dish or a bowl. The table was
laid for the whole of Christmas, and all the eatables in the house were
set out on it: a whole boar's head grinned on a red painted wooden
plate, surrounded by brawns, tongues, joints and briskets; there were
butter-dishes and loaves, cakes and wafers; jugs of sweet-scented
juniper-wood filled with foaming Christmas beer. The red light of
early morning shone on the little green, hoar-frosted windows, and it
looked as though it were summer outside; but within, the great fire
on the hearth spread a splendid warmth. Peter took his pocket-knife
and cut slices of bread, spreading butter thickly upon them with his
thumb, and invited his guests to do the same. When the hot ale had been
drunk, the taciturn host opened the conversation, for Paul was a little
embarrassed how to begin.

"Did you have a good journey from the town or not?"

"Splendid!" answered Paul. "The chestnuts ran along like lightning!"

But Peter did not like the town horses and always ignored them when
Paul made an ostentatious allusion to them.

"Is corn selling well this Christmas?" he continued.

"The price is low, for those confounded Livlanders had a fine harvest."

"And you grudge it them! Don't curse the harvest, brother! You don't
know what you may come to. The more one curses the she-goat, the more
it prospers!"

"But I must live too!"

"Plough, rake and sow, and you will reap."

"Ah, the old story!"

"Yes, the old story! The priest reads in the church and prays God for
a good harvest, and the tradesman in the town grumbles when God gives
it. To the deuce with such people who wish to thrive on the needs of
others!"

Paul was about to answer but now the two wives intervened and begged
them for heaven's sake to keep the Christmas peace.

The two opponents were silent, and threw angry glances at each other;
but Mats and Karin drank at the same corner of the table out of the
same jug, and the two old women looked at each other with a meaning
smile.

"Pass me the salt," said Peter, and stretched out his arm.

Mats passed his father the salt, but spilt some on the table-cloth.

"Be careful with God's gift," said Peter. "Salt is very dear."

Paul felt the thrust, but kept silence. The women gave a new turn to
the conversation, and a storm was averted. When Paul and Peter had
finished eating they went out in order to get fresh air and to inspect
the fields and animals. They began by visiting the cattle-stall.

"What will you give me for this?" asked Peter, pulling the calf's tail.

"When he is an ox, and you bring him to the town in the spring, I will
tell you."

"There is nothing to prevent me, but I won't bring my ox to town."

"We shall see," said Paul.

"What shall we see?" asked Peter, and looked at him with his head on
one side. "I understand your dodges well enough, but though a sow may
get her snout through a paling it does not follow that she will get her
body through too."

"We shall see! We shall see!"

Peter would not ask any more.

They went on and came to the stable. "What will you give me for this?"
asked Peter, lifting the black stallion's hind leg. "It is ten and a
quarter to its backbone."

"My left chestnut is eleven, and the right is ten and a half," said
Paul.

Peter did not apparently hear this, but opened the stallion's mouth in
order to show its fine teeth.

"That horse is like a sheep," said Paul. "You try that with the
chestnut, and you will never hear a cuckoo again."

"Everyone speaks to his like," said the muller, and talked to the sow.

The conversation would not flow. They looked at the sheep and the
pigs, but either Paul's interest seemed forced, or the proximity of
the chestnut horses, who were in the stable close by, had a disturbing
effect; at any rate, they were out in the fresh air again and took
a walk in the fields. The snow prevented Peter going into effusive
details, but he pointed out where he had done his autumn sowing, where
the spring sowing would take place, and where the fallow ground lay.
Then they had to inspect the stacks of wood and straw to see whether
they were dry or damp, to find out whether the bees were frozen in
their hives, and whether it was too hot for the geese in their house.

By this time it was nearly noon and the bell rang for High Mass. Then
they went again into the church and had a midday nap and went home to
eat. They ate for three hours and then enjoyed the twilight. The elder
men sat in their chairs and nodded; their wives sat by the fire which
blazed so brightly that it dispelled the darkness, and chatted about
weaving and baking. Mats and Karin had seated themselves on a box and
whispered about their affairs. Olle the shop-boy had his arm round
Lisa and Jöns his round the maid-servant; they sat on the ground and
guessed riddles whose solution caused little Sven great difficulty.
But the glow on the hearth became more subdued, the talk became more
intermittent; the elders snored, the women nodded, and Mats and Karin
nestled closer together; the lads and maid-servants became still, and
soon an afternoon sleep prevailed throughout the house.

Peter's wife awoke first, and it was quite dark; she blew up the fire
on the hearth and made a blaze. The men woke up gradually and there
was a stir in the room. The youths, girls, and women sat down in the
Christmas straw round the fire to crack nuts and tell stories. Paul
fetched a bottle of Spanish wine, with which to make himself and Peter
jolly while they talked and played cards to while away the long winter
evening. When they had filled their glasses and drunk to each other,
Peter remarking that the wine was too sweet, Paul boldly seized the
threads of the conversation in order to bring them into order and
began: "Now, Brother Peter, if you want us to talk about a matter you
know of, draw out the cork and let it flow."

"That's all right," said Peter, "but I have always thought when the
right Abraham comes, Sarah dances. Good! What will you give your boy?"

"Just as much as you give your girl."

Peter scratched his head. "It depend! what sort of year this is.
The dowry runs into money, and if I have a bad year, there will be
no money, and one does not know how it will go, for the snow came in
autumn on the seed when the fields were wet."

"Just the same with me," said Paid. "We will let it stand over till
the autumn, and if we can both produce the same amount we will let the
organ blow, as the verger says, and if fortune is kind the ox will
calve as well as the cow."

"Very well! And so the matter remains: the boy and the girl must wait
till the corn is in the ear."

Then they began to drink; but the younger ones had pushed away the
straw and sat in a circle to "hunt the slipper." Paul and Peter sat
for a while looking on at the game; at last Paul felt exhilarated
by drinking, and felt strongly tempted to start a more lively
conversation. He knew very well how to do so.

"Well, Peter," he resumed, "are you coming to the city this winter?"

Peter showed his teeth like an ill-tempered dog, looked at Paul to see
if he meant it seriously, and said:

"N-no! I don't think I shall!"

"Still as prejudiced against the town as ten years ago? What! Can you
not bear to look at it through seven palings?"

"I wouldn't have it as a gift, if you threw it at me! I don't need it
at all, but it can't live without me."

"So you say!"

"So I say! I have meat and hay, beer and bread, fuel and timber, house
and clothing; what do I want with you then? I build my house, I plough
my field, I cut my wood; my old woman spins my yarn, weaves my coat,
bakes my bread, and brews my beer. What do you do? You tax my crop; you
impose tolls on my wood; you empty my granary. You settle down on a
stone as bald as the palm of my hand; you neither sow nor plough, but
you reap and gather into barns; you eat my bread and drink my beer; you
burn my wood and spin my wool; you sit there like a lazy monk and take
tithe, and what do you give me for it?"

"Listen! Listen!" stammered Paul. "Don't you get my salt?"

"Your salt! You make no salt; and if you had not grabbed at it, so that
we needed you as a middleman, you could not grind us down. And your
sugar? I do not need your sugar, I have my bees!"

"Don't you get my iron?"

"Your iron! Where do you dig that up? In the gutters? What!"

"Don't you get my wine?"

"Where do you plant it? On the roofs?"

"Don't you get my silver and my gold?"

"What should I do with them, even if you had any? Can I make a knife, a
plough, a spade, a brush, or a winnowing-fan out of them? No, I won't
have any of it. All your business is useless, and if there were not so
many fools to buy your stuff, you would starve. Remember, if all the
'louts of peasants,' as you call them, recovered their reason, so that
they did not take the trouble to change their crops for your rubbish,
what would you eat then? What?"

"Eat? One does not live in order to eat."

"No, but one lives by eating. And those who live by cheating others can
also keep race-courses and dancing-houses where one learns such fine
things; they can print books where one can read that all which the idle
do is well done, and that it is honourable to steal if one only takes
a sword in one's hand, sticks a rag on a pole, marches into a foreign
land and says 'Now there is war!'"

"You always bring up the old race-course again. We paid the King
ourselves for it, so that we might keep it in peace."

"Paid it yourselves! Yes, how did the matter go? When it was made, it
was said that the town should pay for it; then you complained, and said
they were such bad times, for the peasants would not buy your goods.
And what did you do then? You put up the price of salt. Yes, I remember
it well, and you shall be paid back for it. And so the peasant had to
pay for the race-course and all your other tomfoolery, for that you
must have, for you have jammed yourselves together like bees in a hive
and see neither the sun nor the moon."

Peter's intoxication began to gain the upper hand, and he had an inner
vision of the hated chestnut horses as embodying the showiness of the
town.

"And though you have not so much grass as can grow on my chin, yet you
can support two chestnuts. What do they eat? Sugar and salt? What!
Raisins and almonds perhaps? And what do your chestnuts do? Do they
plough; do they draw logs of wood or a load? No, they keep clear of all
that. I know well what they draw, but that I don't say; but I know well
that the streets there are not longer than my turnipfield. Yes, that
is what they can do, the lazy beggars. Deuce take me if I don't have a
turn at being idle. Listen, mother, do you want to be idle, then we
will get a pair of red chestnuts with Cordova-leather trappings and
silver knobs on the harness. Come, mother, we will be idle, then we can
drive in a blue painted sledge with the servants behind, put our feet
in foot-warmers of otter-skin, and then we can sleep out the morning
with a velvet cap on our head, and drink Spanish wine sugared. Eh,
mother, come! We will be lazy too!"

Paul began to get angry. "I believe the Spanish wine has got into your
head, although you neither planted it nor pressed the grapes," he said.

Peter felt that he had been insulted, but he was too befogged to
understand it at once. "The wine, you say, and I think you shrug your
shoulders. Remember he who has got a loose tongue must cover his back.
One fellow may sneeze into a silk handkerchief and another may throw it
on the ground, but both can eat out of the same trough. What are you
talking about wine for? Have I looked into _your_ mouth? Do you think I
have nothing of my own to drink? May the devil take your wine! Come out
in the courtyard and I'll make you feel something!"

Peter threw away the rest of his wine and got up in order to go out.
Paul was held back by the women who begged him for Christ's sake not
to go. Peter would cool down, they said, and the Christmas peace should
not be disturbed. Peter was envious and did not like anyone to "boss"
him. Paul at first wished to return to the town at once, but gradually
he let himself be smoothed down and took part in the game, while Peter
worked off his rage outside. It was not long before there was a knock
at the window and a little while after at the door. When they opened
it, Peter entered it, wearing a sheep-skin, and hobbled about like a
goat, so that the straw on the floor was all sent flying and the others
jumped up on seats and tables. Their merriment soon became uproarious;
they ate and drank without any more quarrelling till night-time, and
then they went to sleep.

When the Christmas festivities were over, Paul returned home with his
family, and Karin and Mats were an engaged couple. It was arranged that
the wedding should take place in the following autumn, if the harvest
and trade were good. So the new year began with hope for the younger
ones and renewed effort on the part of their elders.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the first snow fell on the following November, Peter harnessed his
black stallion to the sledge and took Mats with him, in order to drive
to the town and talk about the wedding. The harvest had been better
than they had dared to expect, and Peter could give a fair sum as a
dowry. There was a splendid surface on the high-road for the sledge,
and Peter was in a good humour, although he could not dispel a certain
uneasiness at again coming to the town, where he had not been for ten
years, and where he had met with a number of misadventures which made
him dislike the town-dwellers. For the same reason Mats had never been
able to make a journey to the town till now, when he found himself on
the way to a place full of wonderful things, the description of which,
with embellishments which he had heard from returning peasants, had
sounded to him like fairy-tales.

They went along briskly, for the stallion was a good sledge-trotter,
and it was not long before the North Bridge rumbled under the horse's
hoofs. Mats was quite stupefied at the wonders which he saw--houses as
large as mountains and standing so closely together!

"See!" he said, "what good neighbours they can be to each other, and
we in the country can hardly keep the peace at a quarter of a mile's
distance. And so many churches! How religious they are! And the town
hall right in the middle where one can get justice the whole day long!"

Peter made a grimace, and answered nothing.

They came to the tollgate, which was politely opened and closed again
without their having to get down from the sledge. Mats thought that
that was a good custom for he knew what a trouble it was to open a
heavy gate, but Peter cracked his whip so that the horse began to run,
for he wanted to enter the town as a person of importance. But they
heard a cry behind them, and two of the city guards ran at them with
lowered halberds, while a third seized the horse by the bridle and
brought the sledge to a standstill, "Are you trying to bolt, you d----d
lout of a peasant!" shouted the gate-keeper, coming up.

"Bolt?" asked Peter humbly, beginning to remember his former
misadventure in the city.

"Hold your mouth and come!"

The black stallion was led back to the toll-house, where the travellers
had to wait for half an hour, while the sledge was searched and their
names were written down. They were at last liberated with an order to
proceed at a walking pace.

When they reached the Smiths' Street, the sledge-runners began to
knock against the stones, for the snow had been cleared away. The
horse exerted himself and pulled with all his strength, but they
only advanced step by step and could not understand why it was so
difficult. Peter struck the horse, but it was already doing its best
with its loins strained, and its hoofs struck sparks from the stones
of the street. Mats simply sat there staring up at the high houses and
marvelling at the wonderful things which hung outside them: here were
horseshoes and carriage-wheels; there were fiddles, lutes, trumpets;
there clothes, sets of harness, and guns. The baker had hung up a large
B-shaped biscuit, the carpenter a table, the butcher a sheep! "They
must have very little room inside," he remarked to his father, when at
the same moment a snow-ball flung from behind struck off his cap. Peter
and Mats turned round and saw that the whole back part of the sledge
was packed with boys. "Be off with you!" said Peter.

The boys put out their tongues at him. Then Peter raised his whip and
struck at the mass of them, but was so unfortunate in his stroke that
the whiplash caught the eye of a baker's boy, who uttered a frightful
yell and dropped a basket of loaves which he was carrying. At the same
time people came running together and an angry blacksmith mounted on
the sledge and gave Peter such a blow on his mouth and nose that he
saw sparks. "Are you striking the boy, you stupid ox of a peasant?" he
cried.

Mats was about to intervene and to throw himself on the smith, when the
crowd of people joined in. The fighting waxed furious, and Peter and
Mats had been soundly thrashed when the guards came up and finished the
matter by taking down the names of the two disturbers of the peace and
summoning them to the town hall.

"This is worse than being in an enemy's country," said Peter, "for here
one cannot defend oneself."

"What have you got to do here then, ox-driver?" said the smith.

"I have to bring you food, or you would be hungry," said Peter.

"Listen to the clodhopper," said the smith. "They have no manners,
these mud-larks, when they come among people, but they will learn some,
you bet!"

The black stallion was set free and had to draw the sledge with the
back part full of boys, who had settled upon it like crows upon a piece
of carrion, up the street.

"That is very strange," said Mats, "that these devils of boys have a
right to ride free."

"That is municipal law, you see," answered Peter.

"Yes, but the civil law doesn't allow it."

"The civil law is not in force here," said his father.

Now they had reached the great market-place. Here Peter stopped and got
down. The boys were discontented because they could not go farther, but
Peter asked humbly for consideration.

He looked for something he could tie his horse to till he had found
his brother, whose address he had forgotten. He saw a stake with rings
attached to it standing in the middle of the market-place, which seemed
suitable, and to this he tied his horse, while the onlookers grinned
and made jests at his expense which he did not understand. Then he
turned to the one who looked most sensible and asked for the house of
his brother Paul. There were fifty Pauls all tradesmen and just as many
Peters, so that he could get no exact information. Peter and Mats now
felt hungry and proceeded to look for a tavern. Paul, they thought, was
such an important tradesman that they would be sure to be able to find
him some time.

As they walked away they came to the ironmarket. Horses were being
sold there, and there was much to look at.

"See!" said Mats, "there are the chestnuts, I declare!"

Peter stared with wide-open eyes. There were really Brother Paul's
chestnuts which had turned up again. A sinful longing to possess them
awoke in him, and he inquired the price. It was very high, but would
not his heart exult if he could drive with them to his brother's door
and call to the coachman, "Unharness the chestnuts! Take the chestnuts
to the stable! Give the chestnuts their oats"? And how the peasants
would stare when he came home with them, and had the black stallion
tied behind as an extra horse!

So he gave the seller earnest-money, and said he would fetch the horses
later in the day. The bargain was sealed with some food and beer in
the iron-market tavern, and Peter found out from the merchants where
his foster-brother lived--in the seventh cross-street on the left
hand. Peter and Mats began to count the streets, but did not get more
than half-way to the seventh, for they had to stand and stare at the
quantities of strange things exposed in the shops for sale. Besides,
the street was very narrow so that they collided with foot-passengers
and carriages, and received thumps before and behind. They got quite
out of their reckoning and had to return to the iron-market and begin
counting again.

After they had repeated this process more than once, they were tired
and thirsty and went into a tavern. But when they came out again, they
did not know their right from their left; the afternoon had come on
and it was twilight. Then Peter remembered the black stallion which
had nothing to eat or drink, and after asking their way several times
they reached the Great Market. But instead of the black stallion and
the sledge, which had disappeared, they found two of the city police
waiting for them. These, after writing down their names, took them
by the collar and marched them to the lock-up for the night. Peter
tried to defend his freedom from what he called violence, but was
immediately knocked down and had his hands tied behind him. He demanded
an explanation, but that, he was told, would be given him next day, and
in such a manner that he would remember it.

The two prisoners were taken to a long vaulted room under the town
hall, which was filled with men of every age and class. A horn lantern
threw a feeble light over the prisoners, who sat or lay on benches
placed along the wall. Never had Peter and Mats seen men of such
an appearance or in such a condition. Their clothes were in rags,
their faces savage and their gestures wild, but however wretched and
humiliated they might be, they had one common feeling--contempt and
dislike for the new-comers. They accosted them in an insulting way and
made fools of them as soon as they opened their mouths.

"Take a chair and sit down, peasants!" cried a half-drunken porter as
they entered.

Mats, suspecting no evil, thanked him and looked about for the chair
which was not there. All those present burst into laughter.

The porter, who because of his physical strength and active tongue had
chosen himself as chief speaker, proceeded to examine the new arrivals
in a magisterial tone.

"What have you done, peasants, that you have the honour of entering
this high-born society?"

"We have done nothing at all," answered Mats, in spite of his father's
beckoning him to be silent.

"Just like ourselves," answered the porter; "but if we do nothing that
is our right, but you, peasants, are born to work. But you don't work.
In spring you scratch the crust of the earth a little, and throw some
handfuls of com on it, and then you go about and watch it growing. Do
you call that working? Then comes summer and you dance the hay in, and
drink over it. Then it is autumn and you go to bed and sleep through
the winter. Is that work? You ought to sit in the fortress Elfsborg and
hew stones, then you would know what work is."

"If you envy us, then go and be a peasant," answered Peter.

"I a peasant? Oh fie! I would rather be an executioner or a
night-watchman! Envious, do you say? Am I envious? Will anyone assert
that? Do you know why I sit here? You should know, for you will think
twice afterwards before calling me envious."

"Well, tell us!" answered Peter. "Tell us!"

"Shall I tell you, peasant--you with your corn-sacks? It is your fault,
I tell you, that I sit here. Do you know Paul Hörning? No, you don't.
Well, he was a corn-merchant, and since he let himself be persuaded in
the spring by a scoundrelly peasant that there would be a bad harvest,
he bought all the corn he could get hold of and had his granaries full.
But it turned out that the peasant had lied; there was a good harvest
and corn fell in price. Paul Hörning got into a mess; he had to sell
his chestnut horses and dismiss all his servants. So I lost my place
and loafed about, and now I sit here. Such are the tricks of these
rogues of peasants!"

Mats stared, and Peter was very sad.

"I am sorry to hear what you say," answered Peter, "but it is not my
fault that God gives the harvest."

"Don't talk about it, for I won't listen. Isn't it your fault that you
won't be content with what you have but sow such a hellish lot of corn
that the corn-merchant is ruined. You should be content with what you
have, then others too might be able to live. I really feel inclined to
thrash you a little when I think well over it. Shall I thrash him a
little? What do you others say?"

The onlookers were of different opinions. A shoemaker's apprentice
opposed the idea, for he had discovered that bread was cheaper when
the peasants had much corn. A German shop-boy, who served in a
general store shop, had no objection to a good harvest for then the
peasants were more willing to buy stores. An organ-grinder, with
a monkey perched on his shoulder, had no objection to the peasant
being thrashed, for the peasants never had money with them, but he
had nothing to say against a good harvest for then the market was
full. A butcher said that Peter should be beaten black and blue, for
when the farmers had a good crop it sent up the price of oxen. A wood
dealer said he didn't want anyone to be beaten, but remarked that if
the peasants had a good harvest they became proud and would not chop
wood; but when there was a bad harvest, wood could be had for nothing,
and one could eat flesh every day. This last remark made the shoemaker
change his mind, for he had noticed that the price of leather fell when
the farmer had to kill his cattle.

The porter, whom all these contradictory opinions could bring to
no conclusion, was himself of opinion that Peter must be thrashed
on principle, and that thrashings never did any harm. But when he
approached Peter with unsteady steps, in order to carry out his
purpose, he was immediately knocked down by Mats, who intervened.
Since the porter was only too glad to rest his heavy head, he used the
opportunity and remained lying there; and as no one else wished to do
the same there followed a silence in the room.

Peter and Mats drew off their furs, and made a bed of them as well as
they could for the night's sleep.

"It is just as if we had fallen among the Danes," said Peter when they
had crept under the furs to sleep; "and yet they call themselves our
countrymen! But to-morrow, I hope, we shall get justice."

Mats, for his part, had lost all hope that they would obtain justice
from the city law, and was very depressed. He said, as usual, his
evening prayer aloud. He prayed for his father, mother and fiancée;
he asked God to shield them from fire and danger; he asked for a good
harvest and good government; and finally prayed God to protect all men
good and bad alike.

This unusual sight again evoked various opinions among the spectators.
The butcher thought it was hypocrisy to pray for one's enemies, since
it was one's duty to defend oneself against them. The shoemaker
scented mischief in the prayer for harvest and said it was equivalent
to praying for the downfall of one's fellowmen, as had just appeared
in the case of Paul Hörning. The organ-grinder thought one ought not
to pray for the Government, for the Government built prisons, and
prisons were expensive and unnecessary; he could not understand what
people wanted with them, since freedom was a man's inalienable right
and highest, good. He and his monkey had never had a fixed abode, and
they were quite happy if they could only be free. The wood-dealer did
not like people praying God to interfere with fires and such-like,
the fire-brigade were well paid for that; he said the peasants had
only mentioned the subject because he was a wood-dealer and liked
to have his wood burning on people's hearths. He also thought that
the Government was quite unnecessary; if people would not look after
themselves and their families, let them be left alone--the Government
should only mix in foreign affairs.

Peter and Mats, who were tired by their exertions and troubles, fell
asleep during the talk, and presently all the others followed their
example. Soon only the sighing and snoring of the sleepers were
audible. But the monkey could not sleep; he jumped up and ransacked all
the pockets he could reach in order to find a crust of bread, but did
not succeed; he rustled through the straw and pulled the hair of one
of the sleepers, who cried out and went to sleep again; he climbed up
to the lantern and extinguished it; then he became frightened at the
darkness, felt for the organ and began to turn the handle, but received
a cuff from the organ-grinder. Them a new idea seemed to come into
his head; he looked for the drunken porter and found him, bit all the
buttons off his coat, and threw them high in the air, so that they
fell down again on the sleeping man. When the uneasiness which this
produced in the sleeper had subsided, he began to tear the porter's
coat into small strips, which he then twisted up into a ball. When this
was done, he fell on his knees, and folded his hands, as he had seen
his master do after a bad day. Then he placed the ball under his head
and fell asleep.

When Peter and Mats awoke next morning the warder stood ready to take
them into court. When they came before the magistrate he appeared to be
in a great hurry and contented himself with reading the verdict on the
"peasant Peter from Spånga" who was accused (1) of trying to elude the
observation of the guard at the city gate; (2) of having beaten a boy;
(3) of having tied his horse to the pillory in the Great Market. The
sentence was that he should be fined. Peter asked permission to speak;
the judge bade him be silent, for one was not allowed to speak in one's
own cause. On Peter's inquiring who was to speak then, he was conducted
out of court and had to pay the fine.

"That is the city law, you see," he said to Mats when they had come
outside and obtained possession of their horse and sledge again. "Now
we will sit up and drive home. We can send for the chestnuts another
time, and Brother Paul can wait, and you too, Mats. A year passes
quickly when one is young."

Mats did not like this, and asked leave at any rate to go and greet
Karin, but Peter was inexorable, and they started for home. When they
had got outside the city gate, Peter turned round and put out his
tongue. "Well," he said, "if I ever set foot inside there again, the
deuce take me! If you townspeople want anything from me, you can come
and look for it!"

As they approached Solna, Peter suddenly started and looked away over
his horse's ears. "Deuce take me," he said, "do I see ghosts in broad
daylight? Look, Mats, can you see anything red over there?"

Mats did see something red, and Peter whipped up the black stallion.
They soon came up to the horse-dealer with the two chestnuts, who had
long waited for his customer in vain.

Now the bargain was concluded, and proud as the merchant Paul himself,
Peter yoked the chestnuts to the sledge, tied the black stallion
behind, and drove fast home. When they reached the farm Peter's wife
stood in the vestibule, and thought her brother-in-law bad come from
the town. When she saw how the matter stood she became sad and said,
"Didn't I say that people get proud simply by going to town."

But Peter was so glad to be home again that he did not listen to his
wife, and the chestnuts added to his cheerfulness. The thought that
Paul had received a lesson put him in quite a good humour, so that he
hummed to himself as he led the chestnuts to the stable.

But Mats was not cheerful, for a year was a long time to look forward
to, and he knew already that when milk begins to curdle it soon becomes
sour.

       *       *       *       *       *

This Christmas Paul did not come to Spånga, although Peter had promised
to fetch him in the sledge with the chestnuts; he said he had too much
to look after.

Spring came and the young corn looked hopeful; but in autumn it rained
at the critical time and continued to rain day and night, so that the
corn fermented in the ear, and the straw rotted, and there was a bad
harvest. Peter was obliged to send the chestnuts to the town and sell
them. But that did not help much, for as he had no straw he had to
try to sell some of his cattle also. His servant, however, brought
the oxen back, for the price offered in the town was so low, because
all the farmers' harvests had failed and they had also sent in their
oxen to be sold. Peter became uneasy, for he expected Paul to come at
Michaelmas. He therefore had the oxen taken over to Dannemora, where
they would, as he knew, fetch a higher price.

Michaelmas Day had come. Peter's wife was standing by the fire cooking
sausages; Mats was in the room above putting on his best clothes. Peter
ran about restlessly, and went sometimes out on the road to see whether
his servant were not returning with the money, for to-day Paul would
come, and he must lay the sum for his daughter's dowry on the table.
Peter, who had experienced many mishaps during the past year, had a dim
foreboding that this day would not be a cheerful one.

It was a sunny autumn morning, but the north wind was blowing so that
it was partly cold and partly warm, and Peter felt the same in his own
person. It was quite certain that his servant had sold the oxen, but
he was uneasy at his not arriving. He longed for Paul to come so that
the business might be finished, but at the same time feared his coming.
So he walked up and down the road--looked northwards for his servant
and southwards for Paul; at one time he had the north wind at his
back, then in his face, and so with the sun. At last he heard in the
distance a sound like carriage wheels rumbling over a bridge, and then
there was silence; he stood quite still and stared in the direction of
the town; he shaded his eyes and looked. What he feared came. It was
inevitable. He saw two reddish horse heads appear, and behind them what
looked like a wobbling house-roof. It was Paul who came in a covered
carriage drawn by two chestnuts. He had a carriage, thanks to the bad
harvest, and the scarcity of corn had helped him to recover the horses.

Peter wanted to go into the house and hide his head behind the chimney
corner, but Paul and his womenfolk had caught sight of him and waved
their pocket-handkerchiefs. Peter lifted his cap and pretended that the
sun dazzled him; Mats came running out and opened the carriage door.
Peter's wife stood as usual in the doorway and began to curtsy when
she saw the carriage. Then they entered the house, where the meal was
ready for the guests. Paul talked about the state of the roads and the
last war; Peter discussed the question of the church-tithe. Peter's
wife was busy with the sausages and the mutton, Mats was absorbed in
conversation with Karin, and no one mentioned the bad harvests, the
chestnuts, or any topic that might disturb the peace.

When they had eaten, Peter and Paul went out. But Peter had no desire
to show the cattle-stalls and the granary, and Paul took care not to
mention the chestnuts. But at last the other subject, which Peter had
most feared, turned up. Paul began, "Now, Peter, are you ready to
settle the matter? The children are pining for each other, and time is
passing."

Peter looked northwards, as though he wished to fetch the answer from
thence. "You will stay over dinner," he said, "and we can talk about
the matter then."

"Perhaps you are not ready with the money?" said Paul. "That would be a
pity, for I have just now several offers."

"I not ready with the money? Ha! ha! My money does not melt so quickly
as other folks', and although I do not get rich by bad harvests, yet I
am not poor."

"Perhaps, brother, then you will be so good as to lay the money on the
table; then I will go home to dinner."

Peter felt uneasy. "No! after dinner," he answered quietly. "After
waiting so long you can wait a little longer, and I don't think it will
hurt you."

At that moment they heard the sound of horses' hoofs. Peter started and
looked down the road. There came his servant riding, without the oxen;
therefore he must have the money. He assumed a more confident tone and
continued, "But, brother, if you happen to be in embarrassment, I will
produce the money at once!"

The servant came nearer, but he was not alone. Beside him rode an
armed man who held the end of a cord, the other end of which bound
the servant's hands. The horses splashed on through the mud and stood
still. Peter was dumb.

"Halt," cried the bailiff's man. "You, Farmer Peter, have sent your
servant to carry on illegal traffic. What have you to say?"

"Where are my oxen?" asked Peter.

"Forfeited," answered the bailiff's man.

"Next time, four hundred marks' fine; the third time, death."

"Who has made that law?"

"The King."

"Formerly we made the laws ourselves. When did we give up the right to
do so?"

"When the council and the nobles did."

"They never proposed to give the King permission to steal our oxen."

"Weigh your words, Peter, for God's sake!" said Paul warningly.

"Hold your tongue!" answered Peter. "It is you and fellows like you
who sit in the town and pass laws for their own profit. So it goes on!
The King needs money for races and triumphal arches; he takes it out of
the merchant's purse, and the merchant takes it out of the farmer's.
Who prevents me selling where I choose?"

"The law," answered the bailiff's man. "But don't stand scolding there,
farmer. Untie your servant's hands and give my horses something to eat."

Peter was beside himself. He ran like a madman into the house. Then
he took a poker and swept the bowls and dishes from the table on to
the ground; he broke the windows, drove all those present out of the
room, smashed the seats and tables, and roared all the time till he
foamed at the mouth; he chewed pieces of glass, broke tin plates in
two, and trampled on butter-dishes and jugs. Then he stood in the
doorway and shouted, "Out, you hellish thieves! Once right was law in
the world, now wrong is law. Thieves make laws for honest folk, and
now they steal legally. You, petty merchant, don't work a bit, but eat
my bread; don't you know that you ought to pay for it? I have a right
to flog you, for you are one of my dependents! And you, underling of
your thievish masters--you, King's official! What do _you_ do for your
bread? You make entries in a book--you all do that; you note everything
down. If I drive on the road, if I lie down, if I tie my horse, if I
defend my property, if I flog a scoundrel, you make a note of it, and
I must pay for everything. Holy Virgin and all the saints, preserve my
understanding! And now take your chestnuts and your women away, Paul;
and if you appear on my land again, remember what you have brought me
to. Buy a son-in-law in the town for yourself; there you will make a
good bargain if you can pass her off on one of your friends. You may
have got me down on my knees, but I am not rotting, as the old woman
said, when she fell into the churchyard. To that I say Amen! and
praise and thank God for good and evil!" But Paul and his womenfolk
had already gone to the stable and harnessed the horses. As they drove
through the gate Paul said, "Poor Peter has gone mad!"

But Paul and Peter never met again. Mats never got Karin, and there was
no help for it; it was so fated and no one could alter it.




A FUNERAL


The cooper sat with the barber in the inn at Engsund and played a
harmless game of lansquenet for a barrel of beer. It was one o'clock
in the afternoon of a snowy November day. Hie tavern was quite empty,
for most people were still at work. The flames burned brightly in
the clay fire-place which stood on four wooden feet in a corner, and
looked like a coffin; the fir twigs on the ground smelt pleasantly;
the well-panelled walls kept out all draughts and looked warm; the
bull-finch in his cage twittered now and then, and looked out of the
window, but he had to put his head on one side to see if it was fine.
But it was snowing outside. The innkeeper sat behind his counter and
reckoned up chalk-strokes on a black slate; now and then he interjected
a humorous remark or a bright idea which seemed to please the other two.

Then the great bell in the church began to toll with a dull and heavy
sound, in keeping with the November day.

"What the devil is that cursed ringing for?" said the cooper, who felt
too comfortable in life to enjoy being reminded of death.

"Another funeral," answered the innkeeper. "There is never anything
else."

"Why the deuce do people want to have such a fuss made about them after
they are dead," said the barber. "Trump that, Master Cooper!"

"So I did," said the cooper, and pocketed the trick in his leather
apron.

Down the sloping road which led to the Nicholai Gate, a funeral
procession wended its way. There was a simple, roughly planed coffin,
thinly coated with black paint so that the knots in the wood showed
through. A single wreath of whortleberries lay on the coffin lid. The
undertaker's men who carried the bier looked indifferent and almost
humiliated because they were carrying a bier without a cover and
fringes.

Behind the coffin walked three women--the dead man's mother and her two
daughters; they looked crushed with grief. When the funeral reached
the gate of the churchyard, the priest met it and shook hands with the
mourners; then the service began in the presence of some old women and
apprentices who had joined the procession.

"I see now--it is the clerk, Hans Schönschreiber," said the innkeeper,
who had gone to the window, from which he could overlook the churchyard.

"And none of his fellow-clerks follow him to the grave," said the
cooper. "A bad lot, these clerks!"

"I know the poor fellow," said the barber. "He lived like a church
mouse and died of hunger."

"And a little of pride," added the innkeeper.

"Not so little though," the cooper corrected him. "I knew his father;
he was a clerk too. See now! these fellows who go in for reading and
writing die before their time. They go without dinner and beg if
necessary in order to look fine gentlemen; and yet a clerk is only a
servant and can never be his own master, for only the King is his own
master in this life."

"And why should it be more gentleman-like to write?" asked the barber.
"Isn't it perhaps just as difficult to cut a courtier's and to make him
look smart, or to let someone's blood when he is in danger of his life?"

"I would like to see the clerk who would take less than ten years to
make a big beer barrel," said the cooper. "Why, one knows the fellows
require two years to draw up their petitions and such-like."

"And what is the good of it all?" asked the innkeeper. "Can I scribble
such letters as they do, but don't I keep my accounts all right? See
here I draw a crucifix on the slate--that means the sexton; here I
scribble the figure of a barrel--that stands for the cooper; then in a
twinkling, however many strokes I have to make, I know exactly how much
each has drunk."

"Yes, but no one else except yourself can read it, Mr Innkeeper,"
objected a young man who had hitherto sat silent in a corner.

"That is the best of it," answered the innkeeper, "that no one can poke
his nose into my accounts, and therefore I am just as good a clerk as
anyone."

The cooper and the barber grinned approval.

"I knew the dead man's father," resumed the innkeeper. "He was a clerk
too! And when he died I had to rub out many chalk-strokes which made
up his account, for he wanted to be a fine gentleman, you see. All the
inheritance he left to the son, who now lies with his nose pointing
upwards, was a mother and two sisters. The young fellow wanted to be a
tradesman in order to get food for four months, but his mother would
not consent; she said it was a shame to step downward when one was
above. And heavens, how the poor young fellow had to write! I know
exactly what went on. The three women lived in one room and he in a
rat-hole. All he could scrape together he had to give them; and when he
came from work to eat his dinner, they deafened him with complaints.
There was no butter on the bread, no sugar on the cakes; the elder
sister wanted to have a new dress, and the younger a new mantle. Then
he had to write through the whole night, and how he wrote! At last
when his breast-bone stuck out like a hook and his face was as yellow
as a leather strap, one day he felt tired; he came to me and borrowed
a bottle of brandy. He was melancholy but also angry, for the elder
sister had said she wanted a velvet jacket such as she had seen in the
German shop, and his mother said ladies of their class could not do
with less. The young fellow worked and slaved, but not with the same
zest as formerly. And fancy! when he came here and took a glass to
ease his chest, his conscience reproached him so much that he really
believed he was stealing. And he had other troubles, the poor young
fellow. A wooer came after the younger sister--a young pewterer from
Peter Apollo Street. But the sister said 'No!' and so did the mother,
for he was only a pewterer. Had he been a clerk, she would have said
'Yes' and persuaded him that she loved him, and it is likely that she
would really have done so, for such is love!"

All laughed except the young man, who struck in, "Well, innkeeper,
but he loved her, although she was so poor, and he was well off; that
proves that love can be sincere, doesn't it?"

"Pooh!" said the innkeeper, who did not wish to be interrupted. "But
something else happened, and that finished him. He went and fell in
love. His mother and sister had not counted on that, but it was the law
of nature. And when he came and said that he thought of marrying, do
you know what they said?--'Have you the means to?' And the youth, who
was a little simple, considered and discovered that he had not means
to establish a new family since he had one already, and so he did not
marry; but he got engaged. And then there was a lot of trouble! His
mother would not receive his fiancée, because her father could not
write, and especially because she herself had been a dress-maker. It
was still worse when the young man went in the evenings to her, and
would not stay at home. A fine to-do there was! But still he went on
working for his mother and sisters, and I know that in the evening
he sat and wrote by his fiancée's side, while she sewed, only to
save time and to be able to be near her. But his mother and sisters
believed evil of the pair, and showed it too. It was one Sunday about
dinner-time; he told me himself the young fellow, when he came here to
get something for his chest, for now he coughed terribly. He had gone
out with his fiancée to Brunkeberg, and as they were coming home over
the North Bridge, whom did they meet but his mother and sisters? His
fiancée wanted to turn back, but he held her arm firmly and drew her
forward. But his mother remained standing by the bridge railings and
looked into the water; the elder sister spat before her, and did the
same, but the younger--she was a beauty! She stood still and stared
at the young woman's woollen mantle and laughed, for she had one of
English cloth--and just because of that, her brother's fiancée had to
wear wool. Fancy the impudent hussy!"

"That was simply want of sense in the child," said the young man.

"Want of sense!" exclaimed the cooper indignantly. "Want of sense!" But
he could not say any more.

The innkeeper took no notice of the interruption and continued: "It was
a Christmas Eve, the last Christmas Eve on which he was alive. He came
to me as usual to get something for his chest, which was very bad.
'A Merry Christmas, Hans!' I said. I sat where I am sitting now, and
he sat just where you are sitting, young sir. 'Are you bad?' I asked.
'Yes,' he answered, 'and your slate is full.' 'It doesn't matter,' I
answered, 'we can write down the rest in the great book up there. A
glass of hot Schnapps does one good on Christmas Eve.' He was coughing
terribly, and so he took a drink. Then his tongue was loosened. He said
how miserable and forlorn he felt this evening. He had just left his
home. The Christmas table was laid. His mother and sisters were soft
and mild, as one usually is on such an evening. They said nothing, they
did not reproach him, but when he took his coat and was about to go
out, his mother wept and said it was the first Christmas Eve that her
son was absent. But do you think that she had so much heart as to say
'Go to her, bring her here, and let us be at peace like friends.' No!
she only thought of herself, and so he went with an aching heart. Poor
fellow! But hear what followed. Then he came to his fiancée. She was
glad and happy to have him, and now she saw that he loved her better
than anything else on earth. But the young man, whose heart was torn
in two, was not so cheerful as she wished him to be, and then she
was vexed with him, a little only of course. Then they talked about
marriage, but he could not agree with her. No, he had duties towards
his father's widow. But she quoted the priest who had said a man should
leave father and mother and remain with his wife. He asked whether he
had not left his mother and home this evening with a bleeding heart in
order to be with her. She replied that she had already noticed, when he
came, that he was depressed because he was going to spend the evening
with her. He answered it was not that which depressed him, but his
having to leave his old mother on Christmas Eve. Then she objected that
he could not deny he had been depressed when he came to her--and so
they went on arguing, you can imagine how!"

The cooper nodded intelligently.

"Well, it was a pleasant Christmas for him. Enough! The young fellow
was torn in two, piece by piece; he never married. But now he lies
at rest, if the coffin nails hold; but it was a sad business for
him, poor devil, even if he was a fool. And God bless his soul! Hans
Schönschreiber, if you have no greater list of debts than you had with
me, they are easily settled!"

So saying, the innkeeper took his black slate from the counter, and
with his elbow rubbed out a whole row of chalk-strokes which had been
made under a hieroglyph which looked like a pen in an inkpot.

"See," said the barber, who had been looking through the window to hide
his red eyes, "see, there she is!"

Outside in the churchyard the funeral service was at an end; the priest
had pressed the hands of the mourners and was about to go; the sexton
plied his spade in order to fill up the grave again, as a woman dressed
in black pressed through the crowd, fell on her knees by the edge of
the grave, and offered a silent prayer. Then she let fall a wreath of
white roses into the grave, and a faint sobbing and whispering was
audible as the rose leaves fell apart on the black coffin lid. Then
she stood up to go, erect and proud, but did not at first notice in
the crowd that her dead lover's mother was regarding her with wild
and angry looks as though she saw her worst enemy, who had robbed her
of her dearest. Then they stood for a moment opposite one another,
revengeful and ready for battle; but suddenly their features assumed
a milder expression, their pale faces twitched, and they fell in each
other's arms and wept. They held each other in a long, convulsive
embrace, and then departed side by side.

The innkeeper wept like a child without attempting to hide his emotion,
the barber pressed his face against the window, and the cooper took the
cards out of his pocket as though to arrange them; but the young man,
his head propped in his hands, had placed himself against the wall in
order to have a support, for he wept so that his whole body shook and
his legs trembled.

The innkeeper first broke the silence. "Who will now help the poor
family? The pewterer would be accepted now, were he to make another
proposal."

"How do you know that, innkeeper?" asked the young man, much moved, as
he stepped into the centre of the room.

"Well, I heard it yesterday when I was up there helping at the
preparations for the funeral. But the pewterer will not have her now,
as she would not have him then."

"Yes he will, innkeeper!" said the young man. "He will have her though
she were ever so selfish and bad-tempered, poor, and wretched, for such
is love!"

So saying, he left the astonished innkeeper and his friends.

"Deuce take me--that was he himself!" said the barber.

"Things do not always end so happily," remarked the cooper.

"How about the clerk?" objected the barber. "No, they did not end well
with him, but with the others, you know. They had, as it were, more
right to live than he, the young one; for they were alive first, and he
who first comes to the mill, grinds his corn first."

"The young fellow was stupid, that was the whole trouble," said the
barber.

"Yes, yes," concluded the innkeeper. "He certainly was stupid, but it
was fine of him anyhow."

In that they were all agreed.




THE LAST SHOT


On one of the last days of October in the year 1648 there prevailed
much bustle and activity in the streets of the little town Lindau on
the Lake of Constance. This Swabian Venice, which lies on Three Island
close to the Bavarian coast, had long been besieged by the Swedish
Field-marshal Wrangel, who during the last years of the war had been
operating in conjunction with the French and had pitched his fortified
camp on the hill in the village of Eschach.

The negotiations for peace, which had already lasted four years,
had not yet resulted in any cessation of hostilities, only lately
Königsmarck had stormed Prague. But this event had accelerated the
negotiations in Osnabrück and Münster, and rumours of a coming peace
had reached Swabia. Lindau had for many months been suffering all the
terrors of a siege. During the last days the bombardment from Eschach
had ceased, and the burgomaster, who had returned from a secret visit
to Bregenz, had on the afternoon of the above-mentioned day betaken
himself to the inn "Zur Krone," for the town hall had been demolished.
He hoped to meet there some acquaintance who was not on duty on the
fortifications. In the rooms of the inn he had met no one, and feeling
rather depressed, he went out on the terrace to cast a look over
the town and to see what the Swedes were doing in their camp on the
opposite shore.

The Lake of Constance lay there in unruffled calm, and the snowy summit
of the lofty Santis was reflected in it; the edge of the Black Forest
loomed like an evening cloud, misty-blue in the west, and in the south
the Rhine rushed between the Vorarlberg and the Rhetic Alps till its
yellow waters flowed into the blue-green depths of the lake. However,
the burgomaster had no eye for this kind of beauty, for during the
last eight days he had been half starved, and for more than a month
he had been suffering and fighting. He only looked down on the road
along the shore where good-natured Bavarians mingled with quarrelsome
Würtembergers and lively Badenese; he could also see people flocking
to the Franciscan church to take the sacrament. Down by the shore he
noticed a group of men, who stared out on the lake where some barrels
drifted, borne along by the light current; they were busily occupied in
drawing these to land with boat-hooks and ropes.

"What have you there, men?" called the burgomaster down from the
terrace.

"That is a present from the honest Swiss in St Gall," answered a voice.

"Probably wine or must which has lain in the lake and waited for the
west wind in order to float down here from Romanshorn," said another
voice.

The burgomaster drew back from the terrace and went down to the
dining-room of the inn to sit there and wait for the result of this
haul of flotsam and jetsam. The apparently immovable face of the tall
Bavarian wore deep lines of trouble, care and vexation. His great
fist, which lay on the oaken table, opened and closed as though it
were deliberating whether to give up or hold fast something; and his
foot, the toes of which seemed to wish to burst the buckskin of his
top-boots, stamped the unswept floor so that a cloud of dust rose
up like smoke from a tobacco pipe. He struck the ground with his
broadsword, and then immediately afterwards drew out of a bag of
Cordovan leather, which bore the city arms embroidered in silver, a
pair of heavy keys, which he seemed to try in an invisible keyhole, as
though he wished to lock a door so that it could never again be opened.
Then he put the key-pipe to his mouth and blew a bugle-call which he
had had plenty of opportunity of learning during the long siege with
its repulsed attacks and unsuccessful sorties.

Suddenly he heard a loud tread and the clanking of armour on the
stairs. The burgomaster at once replaced the keys in the bag, fastened
it, and swung the strap from which it was suspended round, so that it
hung behind him. Then he placed himself in what looked like a defensive
attitude, as though he knew who was about to enter through the door.

"Good morning, commandant!" he said to the officer who entered and
threw his torn hat with its smoke-soiled plume on a seat.

"Good morning, burgomaster," returned the officer, sitting down at the
other side of the table.

There followed a long pause of silence, as though two duellists were
loading their pistols in order to shoot each other down. At last
the commandant broke the silence by asking abruptly, "What did the
Bregenzers say?"

"Not a sack of meal, not a glass of wine, till the town has given up
the keys! That was what they said."

"Well?"

"Well?" repeated the burgomaster with a threatening glance.

"You won't give up the keys?"

"No! a thousand times no! a million times no!" He sprang from his
chair, crimson in the face.

"Do you know," asked the commandant, "that the corpses are poisoning
the city, since the Swedes took the churchyard of Eschach?"

"I know it!"

"Do you know that all the horses and dogs in the town have been killed?"

"I know it. And I know too, that my own watch-dog, my companion for
twenty years, since I lost my wife and child, was the first to be
sacrificed."

"Do you know that the waters of the lake have risen, that the cellars
are full of water, and that no one can take refuge there any more if
the bombardment is continued?"

"I know it," answered the burgomaster.

"Do you know that our vines, which are growing outside on the hills on
Hourberg, in Schachten and Eichbuhl, are ripe for vintage, and that the
Swedes and French are pillaging the vineyards like starlings?"

"I know it. But do _you_ know that peace may be concluded to-day, that
it is perhaps already concluded, and that we may save our honour if we
wait one more day before capitulating?"

"One day more!" repeated the commandant. "One day more! So we have said
for three months, and meantime our children are dying. Perhaps you do
not know that the cows give no more milk, since they have been obliged
to eat the moss from the roofs, the leaves from the trees--yes, even
the dung from the horse-stables, and to lick the empty meal-sacks. It
has come to that; and now the children are crying for milk."

"The children! Don't talk to me of children--to me who have seen my
only daughter put to shame. Then it was I who begged for help, but in
vain! To hell with the children! Why didn't you take them over the
water before the Swedes had their punts on the lake?"

"You are a wild animal, burgomaster, and not a man. You would perhaps
have liked to have seen them drowned in sacks or eaten, as they did in
Bohemia."'

"Yes, we have become wild beasts among wild beasts during the thirty
years full of slaughter and fire, robbery and whoremongering. It could
be called war as long as the Swedish King lived and led 'soldiers,' but
now they have become incendiaries and highway robbers, who destroy for
the mere sake of destruction. Huns, Goths and Vandals, who destroy out
of sheer rage, because they can produce nothing."

A cry from the street prevented the commandant's answer and drew the
two out on the terrace. Crowding closely round the barrels which had
been just drawn to land, some coopers were knocking their bottoms out
so that the contents ran into the street.

"What are you doing down there?" called the commandant.

"Ah, it is only milk which the greedy Swiss have sent us instead of
wine," came the answer from below.

A woman with a child on her arm came up, and when she saw the white
stream flowing down the street, she uttered a terrible cry and placed
her child on the ground to let it drink. Drawn by her cry, many other
mothers came, and the babies seized the cobble-stones with their hands
as though they were the softest mother's breast, and licked up the
sweet milk like thirsty sucking pigs, while their mothers cursed the
coarse men who thought of nothing but themselves.

"Burgomaster!" resumed the commandant, still more excited by the
repulsive sight, "let us go on the roof and see what the Swedes are
doing; afterwards we will talk of the other matter. As you see, all
bonds are broken: one takes what another has not the power to hold;
family life threatens to dissolve, and young people live anyhow; every
moment one may fear an uprising."

The burgomaster did not listen to him, but ascended the attic stairs
till he crept out through a garret window between the beams on to
the stair-like offsets of the wall. Up these he clambered to the
gable crowned by a flagstaff to which a telescope had been fastened.
Underneath him lay the town in its desolation. Not a single whole roof
was to be seen; not a tree was left in the old garden--they had all
been used for food or fuel. Along the lake shore all the houses had
been pulled down and all the gardens destroyed in order to furnish
material for the ramparts. Through the streets streamed ragged, hungry,
dirty men with wild gestures, all evidently on their way to the inn,
"Zur Krone," round which a crowd was beginning to gather.

The burgomaster now looked through the telescope which was directed
to the opposite shore. There were ranged row on row of hills, dotted
over with white steep-roofed farms, surrounded by pillaged orchards
and vineyards. Enclosed in the midst of them lay Eschach, where the
Swedish headquarters were. An unwonted bustle was perceptible round
the blue and yellow standards, and soldiers seemed to be making some
preparations with the cannon which the burgomaster during the long
siege had learnt to know well. He had even given the worst beasts in
the first siege-battery nicknames. A great scoundrel of red copper,
which had smashed the painted windows of the town church, he had named
"the red dog." On the left a great mortar, known as "the blunderbuss,"
was a regular scupper-hole when it began to discharge its contents.
"The devil's grand-mother" was the name he gave to a third, made of
Swedish iron and said to be the King's own invention. And so on with
the rest.

But behind the besiegers' rampart, on a garden terrace, he saw the
Swedish Field-mar-shall sitting with his officers and drinking
"lake-wine"--their wine which they had cultivated and vintaged and
then, stupidly enough, left in the cellars on the opposite shore. As
they smoked and drank the officers were studying a drawing, which,
however, did not seem to be a map. It reminded the burgomaster of
a rumour that Wrangel had wished to transport the Bavarian castle
Aschaffenburg to his estates by a lake in Sweden; but as that was
impracticable it was said that he had caused designs of the building
to be drawn up by an architect, after he had first stripped it of its
furniture and other contents.

The sight of the wine and the tobacco aroused for a moment the
burgomaster's lower desires, which had been so long suppressed, but
his hatred and his grief, which he had cherished for a generation,
soon reasserted themselves. For those who had no more food nor drink,
who had been deprived of everything dear to them and of peace, nothing
remained but honour. By the side of his daughter whom he had himself
killed (though he could not adduce this secret as a reason for his
obstinacy), he had sworn that he would not give up the keys of the town
as long as he was alive.

Suddenly he saw a cloud of smoke rise from "the red dog," heard a
cannon ball whir over his head and then land on the road below, where
it was greeted with a loud outcry.

"The keys, burgomaster, or we are lost!" cried the commandant, who had
mounted the gable stairs.

"To your place, commandant, on the rampart, or you will be hung!"
answered the burgomaster.

"Give up the keys, or we will come and fetch them!" roared the major.

"Come then and fetch them!" was the reply.

A number of heads looked out of the garret window, and there was a
repeated outcry for the keys.

"Go down from the roof, they are aiming at us!" cried the burgomaster
to the people, who began to clamber up the gable steps in order to put
their threat into execution.

The next moment the flagstaff was shivered into splinters, struck by a
bullet. The burgomaster turned half round and would have fallen, if he
had not supported himself on his great sword. He now drew himself up
and remained standing on the topmost ridge of the roof, like a stone
statue on a cathedral. The people below, however, who had greeted the
courageous bearing of their burgomaster with a cheer, were impelled
anew by their fears to make an attempt against him, as the keys of the
town were in his possession and until they were given up the formal
surrender of the town could not take place.

With the help of the malcontents, the commandant ventured on a last
attack against the immovable burgomaster. Accordingly he mounted to
the top of the dangerous stairs, drew his sword, and demanded that
the burgomaster should descend or defend himself where he stood.
But it soon was evident that the latter's position was impregnable;
and convinced of the impossibility of compelling him to give up the
keys, the commandant turned to the people and asked them three times
successively whether they accorded him the right to open the town gate
and to hoist the white flag.

His question being greeted with an enthusiastic affirmative, he
returned the same way as he had come to the ramparts, accompanied by
the crowd.

The burgomaster, who had remained behind alone, and perceived that
there was no more hope of saving the town, seemed at first to collapse,
but he immediately rose up again as though he had formed a resolve.
With trembling hand he opened his bag, took the great keys out, and
after he had made the sign of the cross, he threw them as far out into
the lake as he could. When they had disappeared in the deep waters, he
fell again on his knees and with folded hands commenced a long, low
prayer. He would like to have made himself deaf just now, but while he
called on God and the Holy Virgin he seemed to hear the blows of axes
against the city gate, through which the enemy would enter to pillage
and rape, to hang and to burn.

But after he had prayed a while he became aware that silence lay over
the whole town, and that the cannonade had ceased. Only from the
ramparts came a low hum of voices which seemed to be speaking all
together; the sound swelled louder and louder till it grew to an uproar
and a shout of joy.

He rose from his kneeling attitude and saw a white flag waving from
the Swedish headquarters. Then there sounded a peal of trumpets and a
roll of drums which were answered in a similar way from the ramparts
of Lindau. This was followed by the sound of axe strokes against the
city gate. A boat pushed off from the Swedish camp and military music
sounded from the opposite shore. And now a cry went through the streets
of the town--at first a mere meaningless noise like the sound of waves
breaking on the beach; but it came nearer, and presently he could
distinguish the final word "concluded," without knowing whether it
referred to the capitulation of the town or something else.

But the cry became clearer and clearer as the crowd stormed along the
shore of the lake, and waving their hats and caps called up to their
valiant burgomaster, "Peace is concluded!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Te Deum Laudamus!" was sung in the evening in the Franciscan church,
while the inhabitants of the town intoxicated themselves with
the contents of the wine barrels which had been brought from the
surrounding villages.

When the service was over the burgomaster and the commandant sat
with a jug of wine between them in the "Zur Krone'" inn. In one of
the roof-beams was embedded the black bullet which had shot down the
flagstaff. The burgomaster contemplated it and smiled--smiled for the
first time after ten years. But he suddenly started as though he had
done something wrong. "The last shot!" he said. "It is long since the
first was fired in Prague--a whole generation. Since then Bohemia has
lost two million men out of its three, and in the Rheinpfalz only a
fiftieth part of the inhabitants remain; Saxony lost one million out
of two; Augsburg does not now count more than eighteen of its eighty
thousand. In our poor Bavaria two years ago a hundred villages went up
in smoke and flame. Hessen laments seventeen towns, seven and forty
castles, and four hundred villages. All because of the Augsburg
Confession! For the sake of the Augsburg Confession Germany has been
laid waste, torn to pieces, cut off from all the seas, left without
air, choked, and has miserably perished. Finis Germaniae."

"I don't think it was the Augsburg Confession which did it," objected
the commandant. "See the Frenchmen celebrating their Masses like good
Catholics in the Swedish camp. No, it was something else."

"Well, it may perhaps have been something else," answered the
burgomaster. He emptied his glass and went home to sleep quietly--for
the first time after thirty years--thirty terrible years.